The Veiled Lady 


I had noticed that for some time Poirot had been growing 
increasingly dissatisfied and restless. We had had no interesting 
cases of late, nothing on which my little friend could exercise 
his keen wits and remarkable powers of deduction. This morn- 
ing he flung down the newspaper with an impatient “Tchah” 
—a favourite exclamation of his which sounded exactly like a cat 
sneezing. 

“They fear me, Hastings; the criminals of your England they 
fear me! When the cat is there, the little mice, they come no 
more to the cheese!” 

“I don’t suppose the greater part of them even know of your 
existence,” I said, laughing. 

Poirot looked at me reproachfully. He always imagines that 
the whole world is thinking and talking of Hercule Poirot. He 
had certainly made a name for himself in London, but I could 
hardly believe that his existence struck terror into the criminal 
world. 

“What about that daylight robbery of jewels in Bond Street 
the other day?’ I asked, 

“A neat coup,” said Poirot approvingly, “though not in my 
line. Pas de finesse, seuelment de Vaudace! A man with a loaded 
cane smashes the plate-glass window of a jeweller’s shop and 
grabs a number of precious stones. Worthy citizens immedi- 


206 


The Veiled Lady 


ately seize him; a policeman arrives. He is caught red-handed 
with the jewels on him, He is marched off to the police, and 
then it is discovered that the stones are paste. He has passed the 
real ones to a confederate—one of the aforementioned worthy 
citizens. He will go to prison—true, but when he comes out, 
there will be a nice little fortune awaiting him. Yes, not badly 
imagined. But I could do better than that. Sometimes, Hastings, 
T regret that I am of such a moral disposition. To work against 
the law, it would be pleasing, for a change.” 

“Cheer up, Poirot; you know you are unique in your own 


“But what is there on hand in my own line?” 

I picked up the paper. 

“Here's an Englishman mysteriously done to death in Hol- 
land,” I said. 

“They always say that—and later they find that he ate the 
tinned fish and that his death is perfectly natural.” 

“Well, if you're determined to grouse!” 

“Tiens!” said Poirot, who had strolled across to the window. 
“Here in the street is what they call in novels a ‘heavily veiled 
lady.’ She mounts the steps; she rings the bell—she comes to 
consult us. Here is a possibility of something interesting. When 
‘one is as young and pretty as that one, one does not veil the face 
except for a big affair.” 

A minute later our visitor was ushered in. As Poirot had said, 
she was indeed heavily veiled. It was impossible to distinguish 
her features until she raised her veil of black Spanish lace. Then 
1 saw that Poirot's intuition had been right; the lady was ex- 
tremely pretty, with fair hair and large blue eyes. From the 
costly simplicity of her attire, I deduced at once that she be- 
longed to the upper strata of society. 

“Monsieur Poirot,” said the lady in a soft, musical voice, “Iam 
in great trouble. I can hardly believe that you can help me, but 
Ihave heard such wonderful things of you that I come literally 
as a last hope to beg you to do the impossible.” 

“The impossible, it pleases me always,” said Poirot. 
tinue, I beg of you, mademoiselle.” 

Our fair guest hesitated. 


207 


Hercule Poirot's Early Cases 


“But you must be frank,” added Poirot. “You must not leave 
me in the dark on any point.” 

“[ will trust you,” said the girl suddenly. “You have heard of 
Lady Millicent Castle Vaughan?” 

I looked up with keen interest. The announcement of Lady 
Millicent’s engagement to the young Duke of Southshire had 
appeared a few days previously. She was, I knew, the fifth 
daughter of an impecunious Irish peer, and the Duke of South- 
shire was one of the best matches in England. 

“Iam Lady Millicent,” continued the girl, “You may have 
read of my engagement. I should be one of the happiest girls 
alive; but oh, Monsieur Poirot, I am in terrible trouble! There 
is a man, a horrible man—his name is Lavington; and he—I 
hardly know how to tell you. There was a letter I wrote—I was 
only sixteen at the time; and he—he—" 

“A letter that you wrote to this Mr. Lavington?” 

“Oh no—not to him! To a young soldier—I was very fond of 
him—he was killed in the war.” 

“I understand,” said Poirot kindly. 

“It was a foolish letter, an indiscreet letter, but indeed, Mon- 
sieur Poirot, nothing more. But there are phrases in it which— 
which might hear a different interpretation.” 

“T see,” said Poirot. “And this letter has come into the posses- 
sion of Mr. Lavington?” 

“Yes, and he threatens, unless I pay him an enormous sum of 
money, a sum that it is quite impossible for me to raise, tosend 
it to the Duke.” 

“The dirty swine!” I ejaculated. “I beg your pardon, Lady 
Millicent.” 

“Would it not be wiser to confess all to your future husband?” 

“I dare not, Monsieur Poirot. The Duke is a rather peculiar 
character, jealous and suspicious and prone to believe the 
worst. I might as well break off my engagement at once.” 

“Dear, dear,” said Poirot with an expressive grimace. “And 
what do you want me to do, milady?” 

“I thought perhaps that I might ask Mr. Lavington to call 
upon you. I would tell him that you were empowered by me to 


208 


The Veiled Lady 


discuss the matter. Perhaps you could reduce his demands,” 

“What sum does he mention?” 

“Twenty thousand pounds—an impossibility. 1 doubt if I 
could raise a thousand, even.” 

“You might perhaps borrow the money on the prospect of 
your approaching marriage—but I doubt if you could get hold 
of half that sum. Besides—eh bien, it is repugnant to me that 
you should pay! No, the ingenuity of Hercule Poirot shall defeat 
your enemies! Send me this Mr. Lavington. Is he likely to bring 
the letter with him?” 

The girl shook her head. 

“Ido not think so. He is very cautious.” 

“J suppose there is no doubt that he really has it?” 

“He showed it to me when I went to his house.” 

“You went to his house? That was very imprudent, milady.” 

“Was itP I was so desperate. I hoped my entreaties might 
move him.” 

“Oh, la la! The Lavingtons of this world are not moved by 
entreaties! He would welcome them as showing how much 
importance you attached to the document. Where does he live, 
this fine gentleman?” 

“At Buona Vista, Wimbledon. I went there after dark—" Poi- 
rot groaned. “I declared that I would inform the police in the 
end, but he only laughed in a horrid, sneering manner. ‘By all 
‘means, my dear Lady Millicent, do so if you wish,’ he said.” 

“Yes, it is hardly an affair for the police,” murmured Poirot. 

“But I think you will be wiser than that,’ he continued. ‘See, 
here is your letter—in this little Chinese puzzle box!’ He held 
itso that I could see. I tried to snatch at it, but he was too quick 
for me. With a horrid smile he folded it up and replaced it in 
the little wooden box. ‘It will be quite safe here, I assure you,” 
he said, ‘and the box itself lives in such a clever place that you 
would never find it.’ My eyes turned to the small wall safe, and 
he shook his head and laughed. ‘I have a better safe than that,” 
he said. Oh, he was odious! Monsieur Poirot, do you think that 
you can help me?” 

“Have faith in Papa Poirot. I will find a way.” 


Hercule Poirot's Early Cases 


‘These reassurances were all very well, I thought, as Poirot 
gallantly ushered his fair client down the stairs, but it seemed 
to me that we had a tough nut to crack. I said as much to Poirot 
when he returned. He nodded ruefully. 

“Yes—the solution does not leap to the eye. He has the whip 
hand, this Mr. Lavington. For the moment I do not see how we 
are to circumyent him.” 


Mr. Lavington duly called upon us that afternoon. Lady Milli- 
cent had spoken truly when she described him as an odious 
man. I felt a positive tingling in the end of my boot, so keen was 
Ito kick him down the stairs. He was blustering and overbear- 
ing in manner, laughed Poirot's gentle suggestions to scorn, and 
generally showed himself as master of the situation. I could not 
help feeling that Poirot was hardly appearing at his best. He 
looked discouraged and crestfallen. 

“Well, gentlemen,” said Lavington, as he took up his hat, “we 
don’t seem to be getting much further. The case stands like this; 
T'll let the Lady Millicent off cheap, as she is such a charming 
young lady.” He leered odiously. “We'll say eighteen thousand. 
T'm off to Paris today—a little piece of business to attend to over 
there. I shall be back on Tuesday. Unless the money is paid by 
‘Tuesday evening, the letter goes to the Duke. Don’t tell me 
Lady Millicent can’t raise the money. Some of her gentlemen 
friends would be only too willing to oblige sucha pretty woman 
with a loan—if she goes the right way about it.” 

My face flushed, and I took a step forward, but Lavington had 
wheeled out of the room as he finished his sentence. 

“My God!” I cried. “Something has got to be done. You seem 
to be taking this lying down, Poirot.” 

“You have an excellent heart, my friend—but your grey cells 
are in a deplorable condition. I have no wish to impress Mr. 
Lavington with my capabilities. The more pusillanimous he 
thinks me, the better.” 

“Why?” 

“It is curious,” murmured Poirot reminiscently, “that I 
should have uttered a wish to work against the law just before 
Lady Millicent arrived!” 


210 


The Veiled Lady 


“You are going to burgle his house while he is away?” I 


“Sometimes, Hastings, your mental processes are amazingly 
quick.” 

“Suppose he takes the letter with him?” 

Poirot shook his head. 

“That is very unlikely. He has evidently a hiding place in his 
house that he fancies to be pretty impregnable.” 

“When do we—er—do the deed?” 

“Tomorrow night. We will start from here about eleven 
o'clock.” 


At the time appointed I was ready to set off. | had donned a dark 
suit and a soft dark hat. Poirot beamed kindly on me. 

“You have dressed the part, I see,” he observed. “Come let 
us take the underground to Wimbledon.” 

“Aren't we going to take anything with us? Tools to break in 
with?” 

“My dear Hastings, Hercule Poirot does not adopt such crude 
methods.” 

I retired, snubbed, but my curiosity was alert. 

Tt was just on midnight that we entered the small suburban 
garden of Buona Vista. The house was dark and silent. Poirot 
went straight to a window at the back of the house, raised the 
sash noiselessly and bade me enter. 

“How did you know this window would be open?” I whis- 
pered, for really it seemed uncanny. 

“Because I sawed through the catch this morning.” 

“What?” 

“But yes, it was the most simple. I called, presented a ficti- 
tious card and one of Inspector Japp’s official ones. I said I had 
been sent, recommended by Scotland Yard, to attend to some 
burglar-proof fastenings that Mr’ Lavington wanted fixed while 
he was away. The housekeeper welcomed me with enthusiasm. 
Tt seems they have had two attempted burglaries here lately— 
evidently our little idea has occurred to other clients of Mr. 
Lavington’s—with nothing of value taken. I examined all the 
windows, made my little arrangement, forbade the servants to 


211 


Hercule Poirot’s Early Cases 


touch the windows until tomorrow, as they were electrically 
connected up, and withdrew gracefully.” 

“Really, Poirot, you are wonderful.” 

“Mon ami, it was of the simplest. Now, to work! The servants 
sleep at the top of the house, so we will run little risk of disturb- 
ing them.” 

“T presume the safe is built into the wall somewhere?” 

“Safe? Fiddlesticks! There is no safe. Mr. Layington is an 
intelligent man. You will see, he will have devised a hiding 
place much more intelligent than a safe. A safe is the first thing 
everyone looks for.” 

Whereupon we began a systematic search of the entire place. 
But after several hours’ ransacking of the house, our search had 
been unavailing. I saw symptoms of anger gathering on Poirot's 
face. 

“Ah, sapristi, is Hercule Poirot to be beaten? Never! Let us 
be calm. Let us reflect. Let us reason. Let us—enjin/—employ 
our little grey cells!” 

He paused for some moments, bending his brows in concen- 
tration; then the green light I knew so well stole into his eyes. 

“I have been an imbecile! The kitchen!” 

“The kitchen,” I cried. “But that’s impossible. The servants!” 

“Exactly. Just what ninety-nine people out of a hundred 
would say! And for that very reason the kitchen is the ideal 
place to choose. It is full of various homely objects. En avant, 
to the kitchen!” 

I followed him, completely sceptical, and watched whilst he 
dived into breadbins, tapped saucepans, and put his head into 
the gas oven, In the end, tired of watching him, I strolled back 
to the study. I was convinced that there, and there only, would 
we find the cache. I made a further minute search, noted that 
it was now a quarter past four and that therefore it would soon 
be growing light, and then went back to the kitchen regions. 

To my utter amazement, Poirot was now standing right in- 
side the coalbin, to the utter ruin of his neat light suit. He made 
a grimace. 

“But yes, my friend, it is against all my instincts so to ruin my 


212 


The Veiled Lady 


appearance, but what will you?” 

“But Lavington can’t have buried it under the coal?” 

“If you would use your eyes, you would see that it is not the 
coal that I examine.” 

T then saw that on a shelf behind the coal bunker some logs 
of wood were piled. Poirot was dexterously taking them down 
one by one. Suddenly he uttered a low exclamation. 

“Your knife, Hastings!” 

Thanded it to him. He appeared to insert it in the wood, and 
suddenly the log split in two. It had been neatly sawn in half and 
acavity hollowed out in the centre. From this cavity Poirot took 
a little wooden box of Chinese make. 

“Well done!” I cried, carried out of myself. 

“Gently, Hastings! Do not raise your voice too much. Come, 
let us be off, before the daylight is upon us.” 

Slipping the box into his pocket, he leaped lightly out of the 
coal bunker, brushed himself down as well as he could, and 
leaving the house by the same way as we had come, we walked 
rapidly in the direction of London. 

“But what an extraordinary place!” I expostulated. “Anyone 
might have used the log.” 

“In July, Hastings? And it was at the bottom of the pile—a 
yery ingenious hiding place. Ah, here is a taxi! Now for home, 
a wash, and a refreshing sleep.” 


After the excitement of the night, I slept late. When I finally 
strolled into our sitting room just before one o'clock, I was 
surprised to see Poirot, leaning back in an armchair, the Chi- 
nese box open beside him, calmly reading the letter he had 
taken from it. 

He smiled at me affectionately and tapped the sheet he held. 

“She was right, the Lady Millicent; never would the Duke 
have pardoned this letter! It contains some of the most extrava- 
gant terms of affection I have ever come acro: 

“Really, Poirot,” I said rather disgustedly, “I don’t think you 
should really have read the letter. That's the sort of thing that 
isn’t done.” 


213 


Hercule Poirot's Early Cases 


“It is done by Hercule Poirot,” replied my friend imperturba- 
bly. 

“And another thing,” I said. “I don’t think using Japp's official 
card yesterday was quite playing the game.” 

“But I was not playing a game, Hastings. I was conducting a 
case. 

I shrugged my shoulders. One can’t argue with a point of 
view. 

“A step on the stairs,” said Poirot. “That will be Lady Milli- 
cent.” 

Our fair client came in with an anxious expression on her face 
which changed to one of delight on seeing the letter and box 
which Poirot held up. 

“Qh, Monsieur Poirot. How wonderful of you! How did you 
do it?” 

“By rather reprehensible methods, milady. But Mr. Laving- 
ton will not prosecute. This is your letter, is it not?” 

She glanced through it. 

“Yes. Oh, how can I ever thank you! You are a wonderful, 
wonderful man. Where was it hidden?” 

Poirot told her. 

“How very clever of you!” She took up the small box from the 
table, “I shall keep this as a souvenir.” 

“I had hoped, milady, that you would permit me to keep it 
—also as a souvenir.” 

“T hope to send you a better souvenir than that—on my wed- 
ding day. You shall not find me ungrateful, Monsieur Poirot.” 

“The pleasure of doing you a service will be more to me than 
a check—so you permit that I retain the box.” 

“Oh, no, Monsieur Poirot, I simply must have that,” she cried 
laughingly. 

She stretched out her hand, but Poirot was before her. His 
hand closed over it. 

“T think not.” His voice had changed. 

“What do you mean?” Her voice seemed to have grown 
sharper. 

“At any rate, permit me to abstract its further contents. You 
obserye that the original cavity has been reduced by half. In the 


214 


The Veiled Lady 


top half, the compromising letter; in the bottom—” 

He made a nimble gesture, then held out his hand. On the 
palm were four large glittering stones and two big milky-white 
pearls. 

~The jewels stolen in Bond Street the other day, I rather 
fancy,” murmured Poirot. “Japp will tell us.” 

To my utter amazement, Japp himself stepped out from Poi- 
rot’s bedroom. 

“An old friend of yours, I believe,” said Poirot politely to Lady 
Millicent, 

“Nabbed, by the Lord!” said Lady Millicent with a complete 
change of manner. “You nippy old devil!” She looked at Poirot 
with almost affectionate awe. 

“Well, Gertie, my dear,” said Japp, “the game’s up this time, 
I fancy. Fancy seeing you again so soon! We've got your pal, too, 
the gentleman who called here the other day calling himself 
Lavington, As for Lavington himself, alias Croker, alias Reed, I 
wonder which of the gang it was who stuck a knife into him the 
other day in Holland? Thought he’d got the goods with him, 
didn’t you? And he hadn’t. He double-crossed you properly— 
hid ‘em in his own house. You had two fellows looking for them, 
and then you tackled Monsieur Poirot here, and by a piece of 
amazing luck he found them.” 

“You do like talking, don't yor aid the late Lady Millicent. 
“Easy there, now. I'll go quietly. You can’t say that I’m not the 
perfect lady. Ta-ta, all!” 

“The shoes were wrong,” said Poirot dreamily, while I was 
still too stupefied to speak. “I have made my little observations 
of your English nation, and a lady, a born lady, is always particu- 
Jar about her shoes. She may have shabby clothes, but she will 
be well shod. Now, this Lady Millicent had smart, expensive 
clothes and cheap shoes. It was not likely that either you or I 
should have seen the real Lady Millicent; she has been very 
little in London, and this girl had a certain superficial resem- 
blance which would pass well enough. As I say, the shoes first 
awakened my suspicions, and then her story—and her veil— 
were a little melodramatic, eh? The Chinese box with a bogus 
compromising letter in the top must have been known to all the 


215 


