HERCULE 
POIROT 


epee 


Chishe 


ifall= 
SUBMARINE 
PLANS 


A SHORT STORY 


HERCULE 
POIROT 


THE 
SUBMARINE 
PLANS 


A SHORT STORY 


The Submarine Plans 


A Short Story 


ligallhaChishé 


WITNESS 
IMPULSE 
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers 


Contents 


The Submarine Plans 


About the Author 

The Agatha Christie Collection 
Copyright 

About the Publisher 


THE SUBMARINE PLANS 


I 


A note had been brought by special messenger. Poirot read it, and a gleam 
of excitement and interest came into his eyes as he did so. He dismissed the 
man with a few curt words and then turned to me. 

‘Pack a bag with all haste, my friend. We’re going down to Sharples.’ 

I started at the mention of the famous country place of Lord Alloway. 
Head of the newly formed Ministry of Defence, Lord Alloway was a 
prominent member of the Cabinet. As Sir Ralph Curtis, head of a great 
engineering firm, he had made his mark in the House of Commons, and he 
was now freely spoken of as the coming man, and the one most likely to be 
asked to form a ministry should the rumours as to Mr David MacAdam’s 
health prove well founded. 

A big Rolls-Royce car was waiting for us below, and as we glided off 
into the darkness, I plied Poirot with questions. 

“What on earth can they want us for at this time of night?’ I demanded. It 
was past eleven. 

Poirot shook his head. ‘Something of the most urgent, without doubt.’ 

‘I remember,’ I said, ‘that some years ago there was some rather ugly 
scandal about Ralph Curtis, as he then was—some jugglery with shares, I 
believe. In the end, he was completely exonerated; but perhaps something 
of the kind has arisen again?’ 

‘It would hardly be necessary for him to send for me in the middle of the 
night, my friend.’ 

I was forced to agree, and the remainder of the journey was passed in 
silence. Once out of London, the powerful car forged rapidly ahead, and we 
arrived at Sharples in a little under the hour. 

A pontifical butler conducted us at once to a small study where Lord 
Alloway was awaiting us. He sprang up to greet us—a tall, spare man who 
seemed actually to radiate power and vitality. 


‘M. Poirot, I am delighted to see you. It is the second time the 
government has demanded your services. I remember only too well what 
you did for us during the war, when the Prime Minister was kidnapped in 
that astounding fashion. Your masterly deductions—and may I add, your 
discretion?—saved the situation.’ 

Poirot’s eyes twinkled a little. 

‘Do I gather then, milor’, that this is another case for—discretion?’ 

‘Most emphatically. Sir Harry and I—oh, let me intoduce you—Admiral 
Sir Harry Weardale, our First Sea Lord—M. Poirot and—let me see, 
Captain—’ 

‘Hastings,’ I supplied. 

‘I’ve often heard of you, M. Poirot,’ said Sir Harry, shaking hands. ‘This 
is a most unaccountable business, and if you can solve it, we’ll be 
extremely grateful to you.’ 

I liked the First Sea Lord immediately, a square, bluff sailor of the good 
old-fashioned type. 

Poirot looked inquiringly at them both, and Alloway took up the tale. 

‘Of course, you understand that all this is in confidence, M. Poirot. We 
have had a most serious loss. The plans of the new Z type of submarine 
have been stolen.’ 

“When was that?’ 

“Tonight—less than three hours ago. You can appreciate perhaps, M. 
Poirot, the magnitude of the disaster. It is essential that the loss should not 
be made public. I will give you the facts as briefly as possible. My guests 
over the week-end were the Admiral, here, his wife and son, and Mrs 
Conrad, a lady well known in London society. The ladies retired to bed 
early—about ten o’clock; so did Mr Leonard Weardale. Sir Harry is down 
here partly for the purpose of discussing the construction of this new type of 
submarine with me. Accordingly, I asked Mr Fitzroy, my secretary, to get 
out the plans from the safe in the corner there, and to arrange them ready 
for me, as well as various other documents that bore upon the subject in 
hand. While he was doing this, the Admiral and I strolled up and down the 
terrace, smoking cigars and enjoying the warm June air. We finished our 
smoke and our chat, and decided to get down to business. Just as we turned 
at the far end of the terrace, I fancied I saw a shadow slip out of the french 
window here, cross the terrace, and disappear. I paid very little attention, 


however. I knew Fitzroy to be in this room, and it never entered my head 
that anything might be amiss. There, of course, I am to blame. Well, we 
retraced our steps along the terrace and entered this room by the window 
just as Fitzroy entered it from the hall. 

‘ “Got everything out we are likely to need, Fitzroy?” I asked. 

‘ “T think so, Lord Alloway. The papers are all on your desk,” he 
answered. And then he wished us both good night. 

‘ “Just wait a minute,” I said, going to the desk. “I may want something I 
haven’t mentioned.” 

‘I looked quickly through the papers that were lying there. 

‘ “You’ve forgotten the most important of the lot, Fitzroy,” I said. “The 
actual plans of the submarine!” 

‘“The plans are right on top, Lord Alloway.” 

‘“Oh no, they’re not,” I said, turning over the papers. 

‘“But I put them there not a minute ago!” 

‘ “Well, they’re not here now,” I said. 

‘Fitzroy advanced with a bewildered expression on his face. The thing 
seemed incredible. We turned over the papers on the desk; we hunted 
through the safe; but at last we had to make up our minds to it that the 
Papers were gone—and gone within the short space of about three minutes 
while Fitzroy was absent from the room.’ 

“Why did he leave the room?’ asked Poirot quickly. 

‘Just what I asked him,’ exclaimed Sir Harry. 

‘It appears,’ said Lord Alloway, ‘that just when he had finished arranging 
the papers on my desk, he was startled by hearing a woman scream. He 
dashed out into the hall. On the stairs he discovered Mrs Conrad’s French 
maid. The girl looked very white and upset, and declared that she had seen 
a ghost—a tall figure dressed all in white that moved without a sound. 
Fitzroy laughed at her fears and told her, in more or less polite language, 
not to be a fool. Then he returned to this room just as we entered from the 
window.’ 

‘It all seems very clear,’ said Poirot thoughtfully. “The only question is, 
was the maid an accomplice? Did she scream by arrangement with her 
confederate lurking outside, or was he merely waiting there in the hope of 
an opportunity presenting itself? It was a man, I suppose—not a woman you 
Saw?’ 


‘I can’t tell you, M. Poirot. It was just a—shadow.’ 

The admiral gave such a peculiar snort that it could not fail to attract 
attention. 

‘M. |’Amiral has something to say, I think,’ said Poirot quietly, with a 
slight smile. ‘You saw this shadow, Sir Harry?’ 

‘No, I didn’t,’ returned the other. ‘And neither did Alloway. The branch 
of a tree flapped, or something, and then afterwards, when we discovered 
the theft, he leaped to the conclusion that he had seen someone pass across 
the terrace. His imagination played a trick on him; that’s all.’ 

‘I am not usually credited with having much imagination,’ said Lord 
Alloway with a slight smile. 

‘Nonsense, we’ve all got imagination. We can all work ourselves up to 
believe that we’ve seen more than we have. I’ve had a lifetime of 
experience at sea, and I’ll back my eyes against those of any landsman. I 
was looking right down the terrace, and I’d have seen the same if there was 
anything to see.’ 

He was quite excited over the matter. Poirot rose and stepped quickly to 
the window. 

“You permit?’ he asked. ‘We must settle this point if possible.’ 

He went out upon the terrace, and we followed him. He had taken an 
electric torch from his pocket, and was playing the light along the edge of 
the grass that bordered the terrace. 

‘Where did he cross the terrace, milor’?’ he asked. 

‘About opposite the window, I should say.’ 

Poirot continued to play the torch for some minutes longer, walking the 
entire length of the terrace and back. Then he shut it off and straightened 
himself up. 

‘Sir Harry is right—and you are wrong, milor’, he said quietly. ‘It rained 
heavily earlier this evening. Anyone who passed over that grass could not 
avoid leaving footmarks. But there are none—none at all.’ 

His eyes went from one man’s face to the other’s. Lord Alloway looked 
bewildered and unconvinced; the Admiral expressed a noisy gratification. 

‘Knew I couldn’t be wrong,’ he declared. ‘Trust my eyes anywhere.’ 

He was such a picture of an honest old sea-dog that I could not help 
smiling. 


‘So that brings us to the people in the house,’ said Poirot smoothly. ‘Let 
us come inside again. Now, milor’, while Mr Fitzroy was speaking to the 
maid on the stairs, could anyone have seized the opportunity to enter the 
study from the hall?’ 

Lord Alloway shook his head. 

‘Quite impossible—they would have had to pass him in order to do so.’ 

‘And Mr Fitzroy himself—you are sure of him, eh?’ 

Lord Alloway flushed. 

‘Absolutely, M. Poirot. I will answer confidently for my secretary. It is 
quite impossible that he should be concerned in the matter in any way.’ 

‘Everything seems to be impossible,’ remarked Poirot rather drily. 
‘Possibly the plans attached to themselves a little pair of wings, and flew 
away—comme ca!’ He blew his lips out like a comical cherub. 

“The whole thing is impossible,’ declared Lord Alloway impatiently. ‘But 
I beg, M. Poirot, that you will not dream of suspecting Fitzroy. Consider for 
one moment—had he wished to take the plans, what could have been easier 
for him than to take a tracing of them without going to the trouble of 
stealing them?’ 

“There, milor’,’ said Poirot with approval, ‘you make a remark bien juste 
—TI see that you have a mind orderly and methodical. L’Angleterre is happy 
in possessing you.’ 

Lord Alloway looked rather embarrassed by this sudden burst of praise. 
Poirot returned to the matter in hand. 

“The room in which you had been sitting all the evening—’ 

“The drawing-room? Yes?’ 

“That also has a window on the terrace, since I remember your saying 
you went out that way. Would it not be possible for someone to come out by 
the drawing-room window and in by this one while Mr Fitzroy was out of 
the room, and return the same way?’ 

‘But we’d have seen them,’ objected the Admiral. 

‘Not if you had your backs turned, walking the other way.’ 

‘Fitzroy was only out of the room a few minutes, the time it would take 
us to walk to the end and back.’ 

‘No matter—it is a possibility—in fact, the only one as things stand.’ 

‘But there was no one in the drawing-room when we went out,’ said the 
Admiral. 


“They may have come there afterwards.’ 

“You mean,’ said Lord Alloway slowly, ‘that when Fitzroy heard the 
maid scream and went out, someone was already concealed in the drawing- 
room, and that they darted in and out through the windows, and only left the 
drawing-room when Fitzroy had returned to this room?’ 

“The methodical mind again,’ said Poirot, bowing. 

“You express the matter perfectly.’ 

‘One of the servants, perhaps?’ 

‘Or a guest. It was Mrs Conrad’s maid who screamed. What exactly can 
you tell me of Mrs Conrad?’ 

Lord Alloway considered for a minute. 

‘I told you that she is a lady well known in society. That is true in the 
sense that she gives large parties, and goes everywhere. But very little is 
known as to where she really comes from, and what her past life has been. 
She is a lady who frequents diplomatic and Foreign Office circles as much 
as possible. The Secret Service is inclined to ask—why?’ 

‘I see,’ said Poirot. ‘And she was asked here this week-end—’ 

‘So that—shall we say?—we might observe her at close quarters.’ 

‘Parfaitement! It is possible that she has turned the tables on you rather 
neatly.’ 

Lord Alloway looked discomfited, and Poirot continued: ‘Tell me, 
milor’, was any reference made in her hearing to the subjects you and the 
Admiral were going to discuss together?’ 

“Yes,” admitted the other. ‘Sir Harry said: “And now for our submarine! 
To work!” or something of that sort. The others had left the room, but she 
had come back for a book.’ 

‘I see,’ said Poirot thoughtfully. ‘Milor’, it is very late—but this is an 
urgent affair. I would like to question the members of this house-party at 
once if it is possible.’ 

‘It can be managed, of course,’ said Lord Alloway. “The awkward thing 
is, we don’t want to let it get about more than can be helped. Of course, 
Lady Juliet Weardale and young Leonard are all right—but Mrs Conrad, if 
she is not guilty, is rather a different proposition. Perhaps you could just 
State that an important paper is missing, without specifying what it is, or 
going into any of the circumstances of the disappearance?’ 


‘Exactly what I was about to propose myself,’ said Poirot, beaming. ‘In 
fact, in all three cases. Monsieur the Admiral will pardon me, but even the 
best of wives—’ 

‘No offence,’ said Sir Harry. ‘All women talk, bless ’em! I wish Juliet 
would talk a little more and play bridge a little less. But women are like that 
nowadays, never happy unless they’re dancing or gambling. I’ll get Juliet 
and Leonard up, shall I, Alloway?’ 

“Thank you. Ill call the French maid. M. Poirot will want to see her, and 
she can rouse her mistress. I’ll attend to it now. In the meantime, I’ll send 
Fitzroy along.’ 


II 


Mr Fitzroy was a pale, thin young man with pince-nez and a frigid 
expression. His statement was practically word for word what Lord 
Alloway had already told us. 

“What is your own theory, Mr Fitzroy?’ 

Mr Fitzroy shrugged his shoulders. 

‘Undoubtedly someone who knew the hang of things was waiting his 
chance outside. He could see what went on through the window, and he 
slipped in when I left the room. It’s a pity Lord Alloway didn’t give chase 
then and there when he saw the fellow leave.’ 

Poirot did not undeceive him. Instead he asked: ‘Do you believe the story 
of the French maid—that she had seen a ghost?’ 

“Well, hardly, M. Poirot!’ 

‘I mean—that she really thought so?’ 

‘Oh, as to that, I can’t say. She certainly seemed rather upset. She had her 
hands to her head.’ 

‘Aha!’ cried Poirot with the air of one who has made a discovery. ‘Is that 
so indeed—and she was without doubt a pretty girl?’ 

‘I didn’t notice particularly,’ said Mr Fitzroy in a repressive voice. 

“You did not see her mistress, I suppose?’ 

‘As a matter of fact, I did. She was in the gallery at the top of the steps 
and was calling her—“Léonie!” Then she saw me—and of course retired.’ 

‘Upstairs,’ said Poirot, frowning. 


‘Of course, I realize that all this is very unpleasant for me—or rather 
would have been, if Lord Alloway had not chanced to see the man actually 
leaving. In any case, I should be glad if you would make a point of 
searching my room—and myself.’ 

“You really wish that?’ 

‘Certainly I do.’ 

What Poirot would have replied I do not know, but at that moment Lord 
Alloway reappeared and informed us that the two ladies and Mr Leonard 
Weardale were in the drawing-room. 

The women were in becoming negligees. Mrs Conrad was a beautiful 
woman of thirty-five, with golden hair and a slight tendency to embonpoint. 
Lady Juliet Weardale must have been forty, tall and dark, very thin, still 
beautiful, with exquisite hands and feet, and a restless, haggard manner. Her 
son was rather an effeminate-looking young man, as great a contrast to his 
bluff, hearty father as could well be imagined. 

Poirot gave forth the little rigmarole we had agreed upon, and then 
explained that he was anxious to know if anyone had heard or seen anything 
that night which might assist us. 

Turning to Mrs Conrad first, he asked her if she would be so kind as to 
inform him exactly what her movements had been. 

‘Let me see...I went upstairs. I rang for my maid. Then, as she did not 
put in an appearance, I came out and called her. I could hear her talking on 
the stairs. After she had brushed my hair, I sent her away—she was in a 
very curious nervous state. I read awhile and then went to bed.’ 

‘And you, Lady Juliet?’ 

‘I went straight upstairs and to bed. I was very tired.’ 

“What about your book, dear?’ asked Mrs Conrad with a sweet smile. 

‘My book?’ Lady Juliet flushed. 

“Yes, you know, when I sent Léonie away, you were coming up the stairs. 
You had been down to the drawing-room for a book, you said.’ 

‘Oh yes, I did go down. I—I forgot.’ 

Lady Juliet clasped her hands nervously together. 

‘Did you hear Mrs Conrad’s maid scream, milady?’ 

‘No—no, I didn’t.’ 

‘How curious—because you must have been in the drawing-room at the 
time.’ 


‘I heard nothing,’ said Lady Juliet in a firmer voice. 

Poirot turned to young Leonard. 

‘Monsieur?’ 

‘Nothing doing. I went straight upstairs and turned in.’ 

Poirot stroked his chin. 

‘Alas, I fear there is nothing to help me here. Mesdames and monsieur, I 
regret—I regret infinitely to have deranged you from your slumbers for so 
little. Accept my apologies, I pray of you.’ 

Gesticulating and apologizing, he marshalled them out. He returned with 
the French maid, a pretty, impudent-looking girl. Alloway and Weardale 
had gone out with the ladies. 

‘Now, mademoiselle,’ said Poirot in a brisk tone, ‘let us have the truth. 
Recount to me no histories. Why did you scream on the stairs?’ 

‘Ah, monsieur, I saw a tall figure—all in white—’ 

Poirot arrested her with an energetic shake of his forefinger. 

‘Did I not say, recount to me no histories? I will make a guess. He kissed 
you, did he not? M. Leonard Weardale, I mean?’ 

‘Eh bien, monsieur, and after all, what is a kiss?’ 

“Under the circumstances, it is most natural,’ replied Poirot gallantly. ‘I 
myself, or Hastings here—but tell me just what occurred.’ 

‘He came up behind me, and caught me. I was startled, and I screamed. If 
I had known, I would not have screamed—but he came upon me like a cat. 
Then came M. le secrétaire. M. Leonard flew up the stairs. And what could 
I say? Especially to a jeune homme comme ¢a—tellement comme il faut? 
Ma foi, I invent a ghost.’ 

‘And all is explained,’ cried Poirot genially. ‘You then mounted to the 
chamber of Madame your mistress. Which is her room, by the way?’ 

‘It is at the end, monsieur. That way.’ 

‘Directly over the study, then. Bien, mademoiselle, I will detain you no 
longer. And la prochaine fois, do not scream.’ 

Handing her out, he came back to me with a smile. 

‘An interesting case, is it not, Hastings? I begin to have a few little ideas. 
Et vous?’ 

“What was Leonard Weardale doing on the stairs? I don’t like that young 
man, Poirot. He’s a thorough young rake, I should say.’ 

‘I agree with you, mon ami.’ 


‘Fitzroy seems an honest fellow.’ 

‘Lord Alloway is certainly insistent on that point.’ 

‘And yet there is something in his manner—’ 

“That is almost too good to be true? I felt it myself. On the other hand, 
our friend Mrs Conrad is certainly no good at all.’ 

‘And her room is over the study,’ I said musingly, and keeping a sharp 
eye on Poirot. 

He shook his head with a slight smile. 

‘No, mon ami, I cannot bring myself seriously to believe that that 
immaculate lady swarmed down the chimney, or let herself down from the 
balcony.’ 

As he spoke, the door opened, and to my great surprise, Lady Juliet 
Weardale flitted in. 

‘M. Poirot,’ she said somewhat breathlessly, ‘Can I speak to you alone?’ 

‘Milady, Captain Hastings is as my other self. You can speak before him 
as though he were a thing of no account, not there at all. Be seated, I pray 
you.’ 

She sat down, still keeping her eyes fixed on Poirot. 

“What I have to say is—rather difficult. You are in charge of this case. If 
the—papers were to be returned, would that end the matter? I mean, could it 
be done without questions being asked?’ 

Poirot stared hard at her. 

‘Let me understand you, madame. They are to be placed in my hand—is 
that right? And I am to return them to Lord Alloway on the condition that 
he asks no questions as to where I got them?’ 

She bowed her head. ‘That is what I mean. But I must be sure there will 
be no—publicity.’ 

‘I do not think Lord Alloway is particularly anxious for publicity,’ said 
Poirot grimly. 

“You accept then?’ she cried eagerly in response. 

‘A little moment, milady. It depends on how soon you can place those 
papers in my hands.’ 

‘Almost immediately.’ 

Poirot glanced up at the clock. 

‘How soon, exactly?’ 

‘Say—ten minutes,’ she whispered. 


‘I accept, milady.’ 

She hurried from the room. I pursed my mouth up for a whistle. 

‘Can you sum up the situation for me, Hastings?’ 

‘Bridge,’ I replied succinctly. 

‘Ah, you remember the careless words of Monsieur the Admiral! What a 
memory! I felicitate you, Hastings.’ 

We said no more, for Lord Alloway came in, and looked inquiringly at 
Poirot. 

‘Have you any further ideas, M. Poirot? I am afraid the answers to your 
questions have been rather disappointing.’ 

‘Not at all, milor’. They have been quite sufficiently illuminating. It will 
be unnecessary for me to stay here any longer, and so, with your 
permission, I will return at once to London.’ 

Lord Alloway seemed dumbfounded. 

“‘But—but what have you discovered? Do you know who took the plans?’ 

“Yes, milor’, I do. Tell me—in the case of the papers being returned to 
you anonymously, you would prosecute no further inquiry?’ 

Lord Alloway stared at him. 

‘Do you mean on payment of a sum of money?’ 

‘No, milor’, returned unconditionally.’ 

‘Of course, the recovery of the plans is the great thing,’ said Lord 
Alloway slowly. He looked puzzled and uncomprehending. 

“Then I should seriously recommend you to adopt that course. Only you, 
the Admiral and your secretary know of the loss. Only they need know of 
the restitution. And you may count on me to support you in every way—lay 
the mystery on my shoulders. You asked me to restore the papers—I have 
done so. You know no more.’ He rose and held out his hand. ‘Milor’, I am 
glad to have met you. I have faith in you—and your devotion to England. 
You will guide her destinies with a strong, sure hand.’ 

‘M. Poirot—I swear to you that I will do my best. It may be a fault, or it 
may be a virtue—but I believe in myself.’ 

‘So does every great man. Me, I am the same!’ said Poirot 
grandiloquently. 


Ill 


The car came round to the door in a few minutes, and Lord Alloway bade 
us farewell on the steps with renewed cordiality. 

‘That is a great man, Hastings,’ said Poirot as we drove off. ‘He has 
brains, resource, power. He is the strong man that England needs to guide 
her through these difficult days of reconstruction.’ 

‘I’m quite ready to agree with all you say, Poirot—but what about Lady 
Juliet? Is she to return the papers straight to Alloway? What will she think 
when she finds you have gone off without a word?’ 

‘Hastings, I will ask you a little question. Why, when she was talking 
with me, did she not hand me the plans then and there?’ 

‘She hadn’t got them with her.’ 

‘Perfectly. How long would it take her to fetch them from her room? Or 
from any hiding-place in the house? You need not answer. I will tell you. 
Probably about two minutes and a half! Yet she asks for ten minutes. Why? 
Clearly she has to obtain them from some other person, and to reason or 
argue with that person before they give them up. Now, what person could 
that be? Not Mrs Conrad, clearly, but a member of her own family, her 
husband or son. Which is it likely to be? Leonard Weardale said he went 
straight to bed. We know that to be untrue. Supposing his mother went to 
his room and found it empty; supposing she came down filled with a 
nameless dread—he is no beauty that son of hers! She does not find him, 
but later she hears him deny that he ever left his room. She leaps to the 
conclusion that he is the thief. Hence her interview with me. 

‘But, mon ami, we know something that Lady Juliet does not. We know 
that her son could not have been in the study, because he was on the stairs, 
making love to the pretty French maid. Although she does not know it, 
Leonard Weardale has an alibi.’ 

“Well, then, who did steal the papers? We seem to have eliminated 
everybody—Lady Juliet, her son, Mrs Conrad, the French maid—’ 

‘Exactly. Use your little grey cells, my friend. The solution stares you in 
the face.’ 

I shook my head blankly. 

‘But yes! If you would only persevere! See, then, Fitzroy goes out of the 
study; he leaves the papers on the desk. A few minutes later Lord Alloway 
enters the room, goes to the desk, and the papers are gone. Only two things 
are possible: either Fitzroy did not leave the papers on the desk, but put 


them in his pocket—and that is not reasonable, because, as Alloway pointed 
out, he could have taken a tracing at his own convenience any time—or else 
the papers were still on the desk when Lord Alloway went to it—in which 
case they went into his pocket.’ 

‘Lord Alloway the thief,’ I said, dumbfounded. ‘But why? Why?’ 

‘Did you not tell me of some scandal in the past? He was exonerated, you 
said. But suppose, after all, it had been true? In English public life there 
must be no scandal. If this were raked up and proved against him now— 
goodbye to his political career. We will suppose that he was being 
blackmailed, and the price asked was the submarine plans.’ 

‘But the man’s a black traitor!’ I cried. 

‘Oh no, he is not. He is clever and resourceful. Supposing, my friend, 
that he copied those plans, making—for he is a clever engineer—a slight 
alteration in each part which will render them quite impractible. He hands 
the faked plans to the enemy’s agent—Mrs Conrad, I fancy; but in order 
that no suspicion of their genuineness may arise, the plans must seem to be 
stolen. He does his best to throw no suspicion on anyone in the house, by 
pretending to see a man leaving the window. But there he ran up against the 
obstinacy of the Admiral. So his next anxiety is that no suspicion shall fall 
on Fitzroy.’ 

“This is all guesswork on your part, Poirot,’ I objected. 

‘It is psychology, mon ami. A man who had handed over the real plans 
would not be overscrupulous as to who was likely to fall under suspicion. 
And why was he so anxious that no details of the robbery should be given 
to Mrs Conrad? Because he had handed over the faked plans earlier in the 
evening, and did not want her to know that the theft could only have taken 
place later.’ 

‘I wonder if you are right,’ I said. 

‘Of course I am right. I spoke to Alloway as one great man to another— 
and he understood perfectly. You will see.’ 


IV 


One thing is quite certain. On the day when Lord Alloway became Prime 
Minister, a cheque and a signed photograph arrived; on the photograph were 
the words: ‘To my discreet friend, Hercule Poirot—from Alloway.’ 


I believe that the Z type of submarine is causing great exultation in naval 
circles. They say it will revolutionize modern naval warfare. I have heard 
that a certain foreign power essayed to construct something of the same 
kind and the result was a dismal failure. But I still consider that Poirot was 
guessing. He will do it once too often one of these days. 


About the Author 


AGATHA CHRISTIE is the most widely published author of all time, 
outsold only by the Bible and Shakespeare. Her books have sold more than 
a billion copies in English and another billion in a hundred foreign 
languages. She died in 1976. 


www.AgathaChristie.com 


Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite 
HarperCollins authors. 


The Agatha Christie Collection 


The Man in the Brown Suit 

The Secret of Chimneys 

The Seven Dials Mystery 

The Mysterious Mr. Quin 

The Sittaford Mystery 

Parker Pyne Investigates 

Why Didn’t They Ask Evans? 

Murder Is Easy 

The Regatta Mystery and Other Stories 
And Then There Were None 

Towards Zero 

Death Comes as the End 

Sparkling Cyanide 

The Witness for the Prosecution and Other Stories 
Crooked House 

Three Blind Mice and Other Stories 
They Came to Baghdad 

Destination Unknown 

Ordeal by Innocence 

Double Sin and Other Stories 

The Pale Horse 

Star Over Bethlehem: Poems and Holiday Stories 
Endless Night 

Passenger to Frankfurt 

The Golden Ball and Other Stories 

The Mousetrap and Other Plays 

The Harlequin Tea Set and Other Stories 


The Hercule Poirot Mysteries 
The Mysterious Affair at Styles 
The Murder on the Links 


Poirot Investigates 

The Murder of Roger Ackroyd 
The Big Four 

The Mystery of the Blue Train 
Peril at End House 

Lord Edgware Dies 

Murder on the Orient Express 
Three Act Tragedy 

Death in the Clouds 

The A.B.C. Murders 

Murder in Mesopotamia 
Cards on the Table 

Murder in the Mews 

Dumb Witness 

Death on the Nile 
Appointment with Death 
Hercule Poirot’s Christmas 
Sad Cypress 

One, Two, Buckle My Shoe 
Evil Under the Sun 

Five Little Pigs 

The Hollow 

The Labors of Hercules 
Taken at the Flood 

The Under Dog and Other Stories 
Mrs. McGinty’s Dead 

After the Funeral 

Hickory Dickory Dock 

Dead Man’s Folly 

Cat Among the Pigeons 

The Clocks 

Third Girl 

Hallowe’en Party 

Elephants Can Remember 
Curtain: Poirot’s Last Case 


The Miss Marple Mysteries 

The Murder at the Vicarage 

The Body in the Library 

The Moving Finger 

A Murder Is Announced 

They Do It with Mirrors 

A Pocket Full of Rye 

4:50 from Paddington 

The Mirror Crack’d from Side to Side 
A Caribbean Mystery 

At Bertram’s Hotel 

Nemesis 

Sleeping Murder 

Miss Marple: The Complete Short Stories 


The Tommy and Tuppence Mysteries 
The Secret Adversary 

Partners in Crime 

N or M? 

By the Pricking of My Thumbs 

Postern of Fate 


Memoirs 
An Autobiography 
Come, Tell Me How You Live 


Cpalle Chuslé 


Collection 


THE HERCULE POIROT MYSTERIES 


Match your wits with the famous Belgian detective. 


The Mysterious Affair at Styles 
The Murder on the Links 
Poirot Investigates 

The Murder of Roger Ackroyd 
The Big Four 

The Mystery of the Blue Train 
Peril at End House 

Lord Edgware Dies 

Murder on the Orient Express 
Three Act Tragedy 

Death in the Clouds 

The A.B,.C. Murders 

Murder in Mesopotamia 
Cards on the Table 

Murder in the Mews 

Dumb Witness 

Death on the Nile 
Appointment with Death 


Hercule Poirot's Christmas 


Sad Cypress 

One, Two, Buckle My Shoe 
Evil Under the Sun 

Five Little Pigs 

The Hollow 

The Labors of Hercules 
Taken at the Flood 


The Under Dog and 
Other Stories 


Mrs. McGinty's Dead 
After the Funeral 

Hickory Dickory Dock 
Dead Man's Folly 

Cat Among the Pigeons 
The Clocks 

Third Girl 

Hallowe'en Party 
Elephants Can Remember 


Curtain: Poirot's Last Case 


Explore more at www.AgathaChristie.com 


lijalle Cus co 


Collection 


THE MISS MARPLE MYSTERIES 


Join the legendary spinster sleuth from 
St. Mary Mead in solving murders far and wide. 


The Murder at the Vicarage The Mirror Crack'd from 


Side to Side 
The Body in the Library 

A Caribbean Mystery 
The Moving Finger 

At Bertram’s Hotel 
A Murder Is Announced 


They Do It with Mirrors 
A Pocket Full of Rye 


Nemesis 
Sleeping Murder 


Miss Marple: The Complete 
4:50 From Paddington Short Stories 


THE TOMMY AND TUPPENCE 
MYSTERIES 


Jump on board with the entertaining crime-solving 
couple from Young Adventurers Ltd. 


The Seeret Adversary 

Partners in Crime 

N or M? 

By the Pricking of My Thumbs 


Postern of Fate 


Explore more at www.AgathaChristie.com 
es 


lipalle Ctuske 


Collection 


Don’t miss a single one of Agatha Christie's 
stand-alone novels and short-story collections. 


The Man in the Brown Suit 
The Secret of Chimneys 
The Seven Dials Mystery 
The Mysterious Mr, Quin 
The Sittaford Mystery 
Parker Pyne Investigates 
Why Didn't They Ask Evans? 
Murder Is Easy 


The Regatta Mystery and 
Other Stories 


And Then There Were None 
Towards Zero 

Death Comes as the End 
Sparkling Cyanide 


The Witness for the Prosecution 


and Other Stories 


Crooked House 


Three Blind Mice and 
Other Stories 


They Came to Baghdad 
Destination Unknown 
Ordeal by Innocence 


Double Sin and 
Other Stories 


The Pale Horse 


Star over Bethlehem: Poems 


and Holiday Stories 
Endless Night 
Passenger to Frankfurt 


The Golden Ball and 
Other Stories 


The Mousetrap and 
Other Plays 


The Harlequin Tea Set and 
Other Stories 


Explo re more at www. Agat ha€ th ristie.com 


Cizatle Chuishé. 
THE LIFE OF A LEGEND 
Mysteries in the Making 


An Autobiography 
ISBN 978-0-06-220457-8 


An engaging and illuminating chronicle of the 
life of the “Queen of Mystery.” 


—_—— 
~ 
6 ae eee 


Agatha Christie's Secret Notebooks 


by John Curran 
ISBN 978-0-06-198837-0 


A fascinating exploration of the contents of 
Agatha Christie's long hidden notebooks, 
including illustrations, analyses, and two 
previously unpublished short stories. 


Agatha Christie; Murder in the Making 


by John Curran 
ISBN 978-006206543-6 


A must for every Chiistic aficionado, Murder in 

the Making is a glimpse into the mind and craft of 
one of the world’s most prolific and beloved authors, 
offering a deeper understanding of her impressive 
body of work. 


Explore more at www.AgathaChristie.com 


CigellaCtuisle 


See your favorite detectives come to life on screen! 


POIROT 
= 


On 


Available via DVD, download, 
and streaming on Acorn TV 


Visit www.acornonline.com. .¢ J ACORN 


Prag ere lemme te TV Ghote Liter tacoma mined MGA OMT Comp ght 200 Agere Cheat \rened A oghty enerend 


Short Stories for Your E-Reader 


iO 


The Tuesday Night Club 
The Idol House of Astarte 
Ingots of Gold 


The Blood-Stained 
Pavement 


Motive v. Opportunity 


The Thumb Mark of St. 
Peter 


Strange Jest 
Tape-Measure Murder 
The Case of the Caretaker 
Sanctuary 


The Jewel Robbery at the 


Grand Metropolitan 
The King of Clubs 

The Plymouth Express 
The Adventure of the 
"Western Star’ 

The Tragedy of Marsdon 
Manor 


The Kidnapped Prime 
Minister 


Coming June 2013 
The Blue Geranium 
The Companion 
The Four Suspects 
A Christmas Tragedy 
The Herb of Death 
The Affair at the Bungalow 
Death by Drowning 
Miss Marple Tells a Story 
The Case of the Perfect Maid 
Greenshaw’s Folly 


The Million Dollar Bond 
Robbery 


The Disappearance of 
Mr. Davenheim 


The Under Dog 
Triangle at Rhodes 
Yellow Iris 


The Mystery of the 
Spanish Chest 


Explore more at www.AgathaChristie.com 


Four-and-Twenty Blackbirds 
Poirot and the Regatta 
Mystery 

The Dream 

The Second Gong 


Coming July 2013 
The Adventure of the 
Cheap Flat 
The Mystery of Hunter's 
Lodge 
The Chocolate Box 


The Adventure of the 
Egyptian Tomb 


The Veiled Lady 


The Adventure of the 
Italian Nobleman 


The Case of the Missing Will 
The Lost Mine 

‘The Affair at the Victory Ball 
The Adventure of Johnnie 
Waverly 

The Market Basing Mystery 
The Incredible Theft 


The Adventure of the 
Clapham Cook 


The Cornish Mystery 

The Double Clue 

The Theft of the Royal Ruby 
The Lemesurier Inheritance 
The Submarine Plans 
Double Sin 

Wasps’ Nest 

The Third-Floor Flat 


The Mystery of the 
Baghdad Chest 


Dead Man's Mirror 


How Does Your Garden 
Grow? 


Problem at Sea 
Murder in the Mews 


Explore more at www.AgathaChristie.com 


The Case of the 
Middle-Aged Wife 
The Case of the 


Discontented Soldier 


The Coming of Mr. Quin 
The Shadow on the Glass 
The Dead Harlequin 


The Affair of the Pink Pearl 
Finessing the King 


The Adventure of the 
Sinister Stranger 


The Mystery of the Blue Jar 


The Mystery of the Spanish 
Shawi 


Jane in Search of a Job 


The Manhood of Edward 
Robinson 


The Gate of Baghdad 
The House at Shiraz 


The Love Detectives 
The Harlequin Tea Set 


The Case of the 
Missing Lady 
The Man in the Mist 


The House of Lurking 
Death 


The Witness for the 


Prosecution 
Philomel Cottage 
The Red Signal 

The Rajah’s Emerald 


Explore more at www.AgathaChristie.com 


Copyright 


This book is a work of fiction. The characters, incidents, and dialogue are drawn from the author’s 
imagination and are not to be construed as real. Any resemblance to actual events or persons, living 
or dead, is entirely coincidental. 


AGATHA CHRISTIE® POIROT® THE UNDER DOG AND OTHER STORIES™ are registered 
trademarks of Agatha Christie Limited in the UK and elsewhere. All rights reserved. 


“The Submarine Plans” was previously published as part of The Under Dog and Other Stories short 
story collection, copyright © 1951 Agatha Christie Limited. All rights reserved under International 
and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted 
the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on screen. No part 
of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or 
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether 
electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission 
of HarperCollins e-books. 


EPub Edition AUGUST 2013 ISBN: 9780062298300 


10987654321 


About the Publisher 


Australia 

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street 

Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 


Canada 

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor 
Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada 
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 


New Zealand 

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 
P.O. Box 1 

Auckland, New Zealand 

http://www. harpercollinsebooks.co.nz 


United Kingdom 

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 

77-85 Fulham Palace Road 

London, W6 8JB, UK 

http://www. harpercollinsebooks.co.uk 


United States 

HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 

10 East 53rd Street 

New York, NY 10022 

http://www. harpercollinsebooks.com 


