THE INCREDIBLE THEFT 


CHAPTER 1 


As the butler handed round the soufflé, Lord Mayfield leaned 
confidentially towards his neighbour on the right, Lady Julia 
Carrington. Known as a perfect host, Lord Mayfield took 
trouble to live up to his reputation. Although unmarried, he 
was always charming to women. 

Lady Julia Carrington was a woman of forty, tall, dark and 
vivacious. She was very thin, but still beautiful. Her hands and 
feet in particular were exquisite. Her manner was abrupt and 
restless, that of a woman who lived on her nerves. 

About opposite to her at the round table sat her husband, Air 
Marshal Sir George Carrington. His career had begun in the 
Navy, and he still retained the bluff breeziness of the ex-Naval 
man. He was laughing and chaffing the beautiful Mrs 
Vanderlyn, who was sitting on the other side of her host. 

Mrs Vanderlyn was an extremely good-looking blonde. Her 
voice held a soupcon of American accent, just enough to be 
pleasant without undue exaggeration. 

On the other side of Sir George Carrington sat Mrs Macatta, 
M.P. Mrs Macatta was a great authority on Housing and 
Infant Welfare. She barked out short sentences rather than 
spoke them, and was generally of somewhat alarming aspect. It 
was perhaps natural that the Air Marshal would find his right- 
hand neighbour the pleasanter to talk to. 

Mrs Macatta, who always talked shop wherever she was, 
barked out short spates of information on her special subjects 
to her left-hand neighbour, young Reggie Carrington. 

Reggie Carrington was twenty-one, and completely uninter- 
ested in Housing, Infant Welfare, and indeed any political 


64 


subject. He said at intervals, ‘How frightful!’ and ‘I absolutely 
agree with you,’ and his mind was clearly elsewhere. Mr 
Carlile, Lord Mayfield’s private secretary, sat between young 
Reggie and his mother. A pale young man with pince-nez and 
an air of intelligent reserve, he talked little, but was always 
ready to fling himself into any conversational breach. Noticing 
that Reggie Carrington was struggling with a yawn, he leaned 
forward and adroitly asked Mrs Macatta a question about her 
‘Fitness for Children’ scheme. 

Round the table, moving silently in the subdued amber light, 
a butler and two footmen offered dishes and filled up wine- 
glasses. Lord Mayfield paid a very high salary to his chef, and 
was noted as a connoisseur of wines. 

The table was a round one, but there was no mistaking who 
was the host. Where Lord Mayfield sat was so very decidedly 
the head of the table. A big man, square-shouldered, with thick 
silvery hair, a big straight nose and a slightly prominent chin. 
It was a face that lent itself easily to caricature. As Sir Charles 
McLaughlin, Lord Mayfield had combined a political career 
with being the head of a big engineering firm. He was himself 
a first-class engineer. His peerage had come a year ago, and at 
the same time he had been created first Minister of Arma- 

” ments, a new ministry which had only just come into being. 

The dessert had been placed on the table. The port had 
circulated once. Catching Mrs Vanderlyn’s eye, Lady Julia 
rose. The three women left the room. : 

The port passed once more, and Lord Mayfield referred 
lightly to pheasants. The conversation for five minutes or so 
was sporting. Then Sir George said: 

‘Expect you'd like to join the others in the drawing-room, 
Reggie, my boy. Lord Mayfield won’t mind.’ 

The boy took the hint easily enough. 

‘Thanks, Lord Mayfield, I think I-will’ 

Mr Carlile mumured: 

‘If you'll excuse me, Lord Mayfield - certain memoranda 
and other work to get through...’ 

Lord Mayfield nodded. The two young men left the room. 


65 


‘Shall we join the ladies in the drawing-room? We mustn’t 
deprive your wife of her bridge.’ 

Sir George grunted: 

‘Julia’s a damned sight too fond of her bridge. Drops a 
packet over it. She can’t afford to play as high as she does, and 
T’ve told her so. The trouble is, Julia’s a born gambler.’ 

Coming round the table to join his host, he said: 

‘Well, I hope your plan comes off, Charles.’ 


CHAPTER 2 


In the drawing-room conversation had flagged more than 
once. Mrs Vanderlyn was usually at a disadvantage when left 
alone with members of her own sex. That charming sympa- 
thetic manner of hers, so much appreciated by members of the 
male sex, did not for some reason or other commend itself to 
women. Lady Julia was a woman whose manners were either 
very good or very bad. On this occasion she disliked Mrs 
Vanderlyn, and was bored by Mrs Macatta, and made no secret 
of her feelings. Conversation languished, and might have 
ceased altogether but for the latter. 

Mrs Macatta was a woman of great earnestness of purpose. 
Mrs Vanderlyn she dismissed immediately as a useless and 
parasitic type. Lady Julia she tried to interest in a forthcoming 

charity entertainment which she was organizing. Lady Julia 
answered vaguely, stifled a yawn or two and retired into her 
own inner preoccupation. Why didn’t Charles and George 
come? How tiresome men were. Her comments became even 
more perfunctory as she became absorbed in her own thoughts 
and worries. 

The three women were sitting in silence when the men 
finally entered the room. 

Lord Mayfield thought to himself: 


69 


‘Julia looks ill tonight. What a mass of nerves the woman is.” 

Aloud he said: 

‘What about a rubber - eh?’ 

Lady Julia brightened at once. Bridge was as the breath of 
life to her. 

Reggie Carrington entered the room at that minute, and a- 
four was arranged. Lady Julia, Mrs Vanderlyn, Sir George and 
young Reggie sat down to the card-table. Lord Mayfield 
devoted himself to the task of entertaining Mrs Macatta. 

When two rubbers had been played, Sir George looked 
ostentatiously at the clock on the mantelpiece. 

‘Hardly worth while beginning another,’ he remarked. 

His wife looked annoyed. 

‘It’s only a quarter to eleven. A short one.’ 

‘They never are, my dear,’ said Sir George good- 
temperedly. ‘Anyway, Charles and I have some work to do.’ 

Mrs Vanderlyn murmured: 

‘How important that sounds! I suppose you clever men who 
are at the top of things never get a real rest.’ 

‘No forty-eight hour week for us,’ said Sir George. 

Mrs Vanderlyn murmured: 

‘You know, I feel rather ashamed of myself as a raw 
American, but I do get so thrilled at meeting people who 
control the destinies of a country. I expect that seems a very 
crude point of view to you, Sir George.’ 

‘My dear Mrs Vanderlyn, I should never think of you as 
i erale?* on. “raw.t?? 

He smiled into her eyes. There was, perhaps, a hint of irony 
in the voice which she did not miss. Adroitly she turned to 
Reggie, smiling sweetly into his eyes. 

‘I’m sorry we’re not continuing our partnership, That was a 
frightfully clever four no-trump call of yours.’ 

Flushed and pleased, Reggie mumbled: 

‘Bit of a fluke that it came off.’ 

‘Oh, no, it was really a clever bit of deduction on your part. 
You’d deduced from the bidding exactly where the cards must 
be, and you played accordingly. I thought it was brilliant.’ 


70 


Lady Julia rose abruptly. 
‘The woman lays it on with a palette-knife,’ she thought 


disgustedly. 

Then her eyes softened as they rested on her son. He 
believed it all. How pathetically young and pleased he looked. 
How incredibly ndive he was. No wonder he got into scrapes. 
He was too trusting. The truth of it was he had too sweet a 
nature. George didn’t understand him in the least. Men were 
so unsympathetic in their judgments. They forgot that they 
had even been young themselves, George was much too harsh 
with Reggie. 

Mrs Macatta had risen. Goodnights were said. 

The three women went out of the room. Lord Mayfield 
helped himself to a drink after giving one to Sir George, then 
he looked up as Mr Carlile appeared at the door. 

‘Get out the files and all the papers, will you, Carlile? 
Including the plans and the prints. The Air Marshal and I will 
be along shortly. We'll just take a turn outside first, eh, 
George? It’s stopped raining.’ 

Mr Carlile, turning to depart, murmured an apology as he 
almost collided with Mrs Vanderlyn. 

She drifted towards them, murmuring: 

‘My book, I was reading it before dinner.’ 

Reggie sprang forward and held up a book. 

‘Is this it? On the sofa?’ 

‘Oh, yes. Thank you so much.” 

She smiled sweetly, said goodnight again and went out of the 
room. 

Sir George had opened one of the french windows. 

‘Beautiful night now,’ he announced. ‘Good idea of yours to 
take a turn,’ 

Reggie said: 

‘Well, goodnight, sir. I’ll be toddling off to bed.’ 

‘Goodnight, my boy,’ said Lord Mayfield. 

Reggie picked up a detective story which he had begun 
earlier in the evening and left the room. 

Lord Mayfield and Sir George stepped out upon the terrace, 

71 


“Yes, Carlile.’ 

Poirot turned suddenly. 

‘Tell me, Lord Mayfield, which paper was on top when you 
went over to the desk?’ 

Mayfield frowned a little in the effort of remembrance. 

“Let me see - yes, it was a rough memorandum of some sort 
of our air defence positions.’ 

Deftly, Poirot nipped out a paper and brought it over. 

‘Is this the one, Lord Mayfield?” 

Lord Mayfield took it and glanced over it. 

Yes, that’s the one.” 

Poirot took it over to Carrington. 

‘Did you notice this paper on the desk?’ 

Sir George took it, held it away from him, then slipped on his 
pince-nez. 

"Yes, that’s right. I looked through them too, with Carlile 
and Mayfield. This was on top.’ 

Poirot nodded thoughtfully. He replaced the paper on the 
desk. Mayfield looked at him in a slightly puzzled manner. 

“If there are any other questions ~’ he began. 

‘But yes, certainly there is a question. Carlile. Carlile is the 
question!” 

Lord Mayfield’s colour rose a little. 

‘Carlile, M. Poirot, is quite above suspicion! He has been my 
confidential secretary for nine years. He has access to all my 
private papers, and I may point out to you that he could have 
made a copy of the plans and a tracing of the specifications 
quite easily without anyone being the wiser.’ 

‘I appreciate your point,’ said Poirot. ‘If he had been guilty 
there would be no need for him to stage a clumsy robbery.’ 

“In any case,’ said Lord Mayfield, ‘I am sure of Carlile. I will 
guarantee him.” 

‘Carlile,’ said Carrington gruffly, ‘is all right.’ 

Poirot spread out his hands gracefully. 

‘And this Mrs Vanderlyn - she is all wrong?” 

‘She’s a wrong ’un all right,’ said Sir George. 

Lord Mayfield said in more measured tones: 


79 


“Aha, you did not notice? But you are a young man. Does not 
a young man notice when a girl is pretty?” 

‘Really, M. Poirot, I can only repeat that J did not do so.” 

Carlile cast an agonized glance at his employer. Sir George 
Carrington gave a sudden chuckle. 

‘M. Poirot seems determined to make you out a gay dog, 
Carlile,’ he remarked. 

‘Me, I always notice when a girl is pretty,’ announced Poirot 
as he descended the stairs. 

The silence with which Mr Carlile greeted this remark was 
somewhat pointed. Poirot went on: 

“And it was then she told this tale of having seen a ghost?” 

Pees. 

‘Did you believe the story?” 

‘Well, hardly, M. Poirot!” 

‘I do not mean, do you believe in ghosts. I mean, did it strike 
you that the girl herself really thought she had seen 

ing?” 

‘Oh, as to that, I couldn’t say. She was certainly breathing 

_ fast and seemed upset.’ 

“You did not see or hear anything of her mistress?” 

“Yes, as a matter of fact I did. She came out of her room in 
the gallery above and called, “Leonie.”’ 

‘And then?’ 

‘The girl ran up to her and I went back to the study.” 

‘Whilst you were standing at the foot of the stairs here, could 
anyone have entered the study by the door you had left open?’ 

‘Not without passing me. The study door is at the end of the 
Passage, as you sec.’ 

Poirot nodded thoughtfully. Mr Carlile went on in his 
careful, precise voice. 

‘I may say that I am very thankful that Lord Mayfield 
actually saw the thief leaving the window. Otherwise I myself 
should be in a very unpleasant position.’ 

‘Nonsense, my dear Carlile,’ broke in Lord Mayfield 
impatiently. ‘No suspicion could possibly attach to you.’ 


85 


“In that case, if M. Poirot is correct, suspicion automatically 
attaches itself to me. I am the only person who could possibly 
have committed the robbery.’ 

Lord Mayfield sprang up. 

‘Nonsense. Whatever M. Poirot thinks about it, I don’t 
agree with him. I am convinced of your innocence, my dear 
Carlile. In fact, I’m willing to guarantee it.’ 

Poirot murmured mildly: 

‘But I have not said that I suspect M. Carlile.’ 

Carlile answered: 

‘No, but you’ve made it perfectly clear that no one else had 
a chance to commit the robbery.’ 

‘Du tout! Du tout!’ 

‘But I have told you nobody passed me in the hall to get to 
the study door.’ 

‘Lagree. But someone might have come in through the study 
window,” 

‘But that is just what you said did not happen?’ 

‘I said that no one from outside could have come and left 
without leaving marks on the grass. But it could have been 
managed from inside the house. Someone could have gone out 
from his room by one of these windows, slipped along the 
terrace, in at the study window, and back again in here.’ 

Mr Carlile objected: 

‘But Lord Mayfield and Sir George Carrington were on the 
terrace.’ 

“They were on the terrace, yes, but they were en promenade. 
Sir George Carrington’s eyes may be of the most reliable’ - 
Poirot made a little bow - ‘but he does not keep them in the 
back of his head! The study window is at the extreme left of the 
terrace, the windows of this room come next, but the terrace 
continues to the right past one, two, three, perhaps four 
rooms?” 

‘Dining-room, billiard-room, morning room and library,’ 
said Lord Mayfield. 

“And you walked up and down the terrace, how many times?” 

“At least five or six.’ 


87 


delicate and most convincing. Tomorrow, then, I conduct my 
investigations. But tonight, I should like to begin by 
interviewing you, Sir George and you, Lord Mayfield.’ 

He bowed to them both. 

“You mean - alone?’ 

‘That was my meaning.’ 

Lord Mayfield raised his eyes slightly, then he said: 

‘Certainly. I'll leave you alone with Sir George. When you 
want me, you’ll find me in my study. Come, Carlile.” 

He and the-secretary went out, shutting the door behind 


Sir George sat down, reaching mechanically for a cigarette. 
He turned a puzzled face to Poirot. 

“You know,’ he said slowly. ‘I don’t quite get this.’ 

‘That is very simply explained,’ said Poirot with a smile. ‘In 
two words, to be accurate. Mrs Vanderlyn!’ 

‘Oh,’ said Carrington. ‘I think I see. Mrs Vanderlyn?’ 

‘Precisely. It might be, you see, that it would not be very 
delicate to ask Lord Mayfield the question I want to ask. Why 
Mrs Vanderlyn? This lady, she is known to be a suspicious 
character. Why, then, should she be here? I say to myself there 
are three explanations. One, that Lord Mayfield has a penchant 
for the lady (and that is why I seek to talk to you alone. I do not 
wish to embarrass him). Two, that Mrs Vanderlyn is perhaps 
the dear friend of someone else in the house?” 

“You can count me out!’ said Sir George with a grin. 

‘Then, if neither of those cases is true, the question returns 
in redoubled force. Why Mrs Vanderlyn? And it seems to me I 
perceive a shadowy answer. There was a reason. Her presence 
at this particular juncture was definitely desired by Lord 
Mayfield for a special reason. Am I right?” 

Sir George nodded. 

‘You're quite right,’ he said. ‘Mayfield is too old a bird to fall 
for her wiles. He wanted her here for quite another reason. It 
was like this.’ 

He retailed the conversation that had taken place at the 
dinner-table. Poirot listened attentively. 


89 


‘Ah,’ he said, ‘I comprehend now. Nevertheless, it seems 
that the lady has turned the tables on you both rather neatly!” 

Sir George swore freely. 

Poirot watched him with some slight amusement, then he 
said: 

‘You do not doubt that this theft is her doing - I mean, that 
she is responsible for it, whether or no she played an active 
part?” 

Sir George stared. 

‘Of course not! There isn’t any doubt of that. Why, who else 
would have any interest in stealing those plans?” 

‘Ahl’ said Hercule Poirot. He leaned back and looked at the 
ceiling. ‘And yet, Sir George, we agreed, not a quarter of an 
hour ago, that these papers represented very definitely money. 
Not perhaps, in quite so obvious a form as banknotes, or gold, 
or jewellery, but nevertheless they were potential money. If 
there were anyone here who was hard up ~” 

The other interrupted him with a snort. 

‘Who isn’t these days? I suppose I can say it without 
incriminating myself.’ 

He smiled and Poirot smiled politely back at him and 
murmured: 

‘Mais oui, you can say what you like, for you, Sir George, 
have the one unimpeachable alibi in this affair.’ 

‘But I’m damned hard up myself!’ 

Poirot shook his head sadly. 

"Yes, indeed, a man in your position has heavy living 
expenses. Then you have a young son at a most expensive age —” 

Sir George groaned. 

‘Education’s bad enough, then debts on top of it. Mind you, 
this lad’s not a bad lad.” 

Poirot listened sympathetically. He heard a lot of the Air 
Marshal’s accumulated grievances. The lack of grit and 
stamina in the younger generation, the fantastic way in which 
mothers spoilt their children and always took their side, the 
curse of gambling once it got hold of a woman, the folly of 
playing for higher stakes than you could afford. It was couched 


90 


motive to consider. But the motive might possibly be some- 
thing quite different.’ 

‘Such as ~” 

Poirot said slowly: 

‘Tt might have been done definitely with the idea of 


‘Possibly Mr Carlile. He would be the obvious suspect. But 
there might be more to it than that. The men who control the 
destiny of a country, Lord Mayfield, are particularly vulnera- 
ble to displays of popular feeling.’ 

‘Meaning that the theft was aimed at damaging me?’ 

Poirot nodded. 

‘I think I am correct in saying, Lord Mayfield, that about 
five years ago you passed through a somewhat trying time. You 
were suspected of friendship with a European Power at that 
time bitterly unpopular with the electorate of this country.’ 

‘Quite true, M. Poirot.’ 

‘A statesman in these days has a difficult task. He has to 
pursue the policy he deems advantageous to his country, but he 
has at the same time to recognize the force of popular feeling. 
Popular feeling is very often sentimental, muddle-headed, and 
eminently unsound, but it cannot be disregarded for all that.’ 

‘How well you express it! That is exactly the curse of a 
Ppolitician’s life. He has to bow to the country’s feeling, however 
dangerous and foolhardy he knows it to be.’ 

‘That was your dilemma, I think. There were rumours that 
you had concluded an agreement with the country in question. 
This country and the newspapers were up in arms about it. 
Fortunately the Prime Minister was able categorically to deny 
the story, and you repudiated it, though still making no secret 
of the way your sympathies lay.” 

‘All this is quite true, M. Poirot, but why rake up past 
history?” 

“Because I consider it possible that an enemy, disappointed 
in the way you surmounted that crisis, might endeavour to 
stage a further dilemma. You soon regained public confidence. 


95 


Those particular circumstances have passed away, you are 
now, deservedly, one of the most popular figures in political 
life. You are spoken of freely as the next Prime Minister when 
Mr Hunberly retires.’ 

‘You think this is an attempt to discredit me? Nonsense!’ 

‘Tout de méme, Lord Mayfield, it would not look well if it 
were known that the plans of Britain’s new bomber had been 
stolen during a weekend when a certain very charming lady had 
been your guest. Little hints in the newspapers as to your 
relationship with that lady would create a feeling of distrust in 
you.’ 
‘Such a thing could not really be taken seriously.’ 

‘My dear Lord Mayfield, you know perfectly well it could! 
It takes so little to undermine public confidence in a man.” 

‘Yes, that’s true,’ said Lord Mayfield. He looked suddenly 
very worried. ‘God! how desperately complicated this business 
is becoming. Do you really think - but it’s impossible - 
impossible.’ 

"You know of nobody who is — jealous of you?” 

“Absurd!” 

‘At any rate you will admit that my questions about your 
personal relationships with the members of this house-party 
are not totally irrelevant.” 

‘Oh, perhaps - perhaps. You asked me about Julia Carring- 
ton. There’s really not very much to say. I’ve never taken to her 
very much, and I don’t think she cares for me. She’s one of 
these restless, nervy women, recklessly extravagant and mad 
about cards. She’s old-fashioned enough, I think, to despise 
me as being a self-made man.’ 

Poirot said: 

‘I looked you up in Who’s Who before I came down. You 
were the head of a famous engineering firm and you are 
yourself a first-class engineer.’ 

‘There’s certainly nothing I don’t know about the practical 
side. I’ve worked my way up from the bottom.’ 

Lord Mayfield spoke rather grimly. 

‘Oh la la!’ cried Poirot. ‘I have been a fool — but a fool!’ 


96 


‘Well, let me see, we played bridge - in the drawing-room. 
After that I went up to bed.’ 

“That was at what time?” 

‘Just before eleven. I suppose the robbery took place after 
that?” 


‘Yes, after that. You did not hear or see anything?” 
Reggie shook his head regretfully. 
‘Tm afraid not. 1 went straight to bed and I sleep pretty 


‘You went straight up from the drawing-room to your 
bedroom and remained there until the morning?’ 
“That's right.” 


‘What do you mean, curious?’ 

“You did not, for instance, hear a scream?” 

‘No, I didn’t.’ 

‘Ah, very curious.’ 

Bei ae Yate beonrsaat sens ea? 

‘You are, perhaps, slightly deaf?” 

‘Certainly not.’ 

See Nid tied was poucible thats was cerca ae 
word curious for the third time, Then he said: 

‘Well, thank you, Mr Carrington, that is all.’ 

Reggie got up and stood rather irresolutely. 

“You know,’ he said, ‘now you come to mention it, I believe 
I did hear something of the kind.’ 

‘Ah, you did hear something?” 

“Yes, but you see, I was reading a book - a detective story as 
a matter of fact - and I - well, I didn’t really quite take it in.’ 

‘Ah,’ said Poirot, ‘a most satisfying explanation.’ 

His face was quite impassive. 

Reggie still hesitated, then he turned and walked slowly to 
the door. There he paused and asked: 

‘I say, what was stolen?’ 

‘Something of great value, Mr Carrington. That is all I am 
at liberty to say.’ 


101 


She smiled, a warm, compelling smile of perfect health and 

‘Do tell me if there’s anything at all I can do?’ 

‘I thank you, madame. You played bridge in the drawing- 
room last night?’ 

Yes.’ 

‘I understand that then all the ladies went up to bed?” 

‘That is right.’ 

“But someone came back to fetch a book. That was you, was 
it not, Mrs Vanderlyn?’ 

‘I was the first one to come back — yes.” 

‘What do you mean - the first one?’ said Poirot sharply. 

“I came back right away,’ explained Mrs Vanderlyn. Then I 
went up and rang for my maid. She was a long time in coming. 
Trang again. Then I went out on the landing. I heard her voice 
_ and I called her. After she had brushed my hair I sent her away, 
she was in a nervous, upset state and tangled the brush in my 
hair once or twice. It was then, just as I sent her away, that I saw 
Lady Julia coming up the stairs. She told me she had been 
down again for a book, too. Curious, wasn’t it?’ 

___ Mrs Vanderlyn smiled as she finished, a wide, rather feline 
_ smile. Hercule Poirot thought to himself that Mrs Vanderlyn 
| did not like Lady Julia Carrington. 

*As you say, madame. Tell me, did you hear your maid 
scream?” 

‘Why, yes, I did hear something of that kind.’ 

‘Did you ask her about it?” 

“Yes. She told me she thought she had seen a floating figure 
in white - such nonsense!’ 

‘What was Lady Julia wearing last night?’ 

‘Oh, you think perhaps - Yes, I see. She was wearing a white 
evening-dress. Of course, that explains it. She must have 
caught sight of her in the darkness just as a white figure. These 
girls are so superstitious.” 

“Your maid has been with you a long time, madame?’ 

‘Oh, no.’ Mrs Vanderlyn opened her eyes rather wide. ‘Only 
about five months.’ 


103 


Leonie responded promptly. She flashed him a glance out of 
the corner of her eyes and murmured softly: 

‘Monsieur is very kind.’ 

‘Figure to yourself,’ said Poirot. ‘I demand of M. Carlile 
whether you are or not good-looking and he replies that he does 
not know!’ 

Leonie cocked her chin up contemptuously. 

‘That image!’ 

‘That describes him very well.’ 

‘I do not believe he has ever looked at a girl in his life, that 
one.” 

‘Probably not. A pity. He has missed a lot, But there are 
others in this house who are more appreciative, is it not so?” 

‘Really, I do not know what monsieur means.’ 

‘Oh, yes, Mademoiselle Leonie, you know very well. A 
pretty history that you recount last night about a ghost that you 
have seen. As soon as I hear that you are standing there with 
your hands to your head, I know very well that there is no 
question of ghosts. If a girl is frightened she clasps her heart, or 
she raises her hands to her mouth to stifle a cry, but if her hands 
are on her hair it means something very different. Jt means that 
her hair has been ruffled and that she is hastily getting it into shape 
again! Now then, mademoiselle, let us have the truth. Why did 
you scream on the stairs?’ 

‘But monsieur it is true, I saw a tall figure all in white —” 

‘Mademoiselle, do not insult my intelligence. That story, it 
may have been good enough for M. Carlile, but it is not good 
enough for Hercule Poirot. The truth is that you had just been 
kissed, is it not so? And I will make a guess that it was M. 
Reggie Carrington who kissed you.” 

Leonie twinkled an unabashed eye at him. 

‘Eh bien,’ she demanded, ‘after all, what is a kiss?’ 

‘What, indeed?’ said Poirot gallantly. 

“You see, the young gentleman he came up behind me and 
caught me round the waist - and so naturally he startled me and 
I screamed. If I had known - well, then naturally I would not 
have screamed.’ 


105 


‘Naturally,’ agreed Poirot. 

‘But he came upon me like a cat. Then the study door opened 
and out came M. le secrétaire and the young gentleman slipped 
away upstairs and there I was looking like a fool. Naturally I 
had to say something - especially to -’ she broke into French, 
‘un jeune homme comme ¢a, tellement comme il faut!” 

‘So you invent a ghost?’ 

“Indeed, monsieur, it was all I could think of. A tall figure all 
in white, that floated. It is ridiculous but what else could I do?” 

‘Nothing. So now, all is explained. I had my suspicions from 
the first.’ 

Leonie shot him a provocative glance. 

‘Monsieur is very clever, and very sympathetic.’ 

‘And since I am not going to make you any embarrassments 
over the affair you will do something for me in return? 

“Most willingly, monsieur. 

“How much do you know of your mistress’s affairs?” 

The girl shrugged her shoulders. 

‘Not very much, monsieur. I have my ideas, of course.” 

‘And those ideas?” 

‘Well, it does not escape me that the friends of madame are 
always soldiers or sailors or airmen. And then there are other 
friends - foreign gentlemen who come to sec her very quietly 
sometimes. Madame is very handsome, though I do not think 
she will be so much longer. The young men, they find her very 
attractive. Sometimes I think, they say too much. Butitis only 
my idea, that. Madame does not confide in me.’ 

“What you would have me to understand is that madame 
plays a lone hand?’ 

‘That is right, monsieur.’ 

‘In other words, you cannot help me.’ 

‘I fear not, monsieur. I would do if I could.’ 

‘Tell me, your mistress is in a good mood today? 

‘Decidedly, monsieur.’ 

“Something has happened to please her?’ 

‘She has been in good spirits ever since she came here.” 

‘Well, Leonie, you should know.’ 


106 


As he did not answer, she repeated urgently: 

‘Will you guarantee that there will be no publicity?” 

He answered then - very gravely: 

“Yes, madame, I will guarantee that.’ 

“Then everything can be arranged.’ 

She passed abruptly from the room. A moment later Poirot 
heard the car drive away. 

He crossed the hall and went along the passage to the study. 
Lord Mayfield was there. He looked up as Poirot entered. 

‘Well?’ he said. 

‘Poirot spread out his hands. ; 

‘The case is ended, Lord Mayfield.’ 

‘What?’ 

Poirot repeated word for word the scene between himself 
and Lady Julia. 

Lord Mayfield looked at him with a stupefied expression. 

“But what does it mean? I don’t understand.” 

‘It is very clear, is it not? Lady Julia knows who stole the 
plans.” 

*You don’t mean she took them herself?’ 

‘Certainly not. Lady Julia may be a gambler. She is not a 
thief. But if she offers to return the plans, it means that they 
were taken by her husband or her son. Now Sir George 
Carrington was out on the terrace with you. That leaves us the 
son. I think I can reconstruct the happenings of last night fairly 
accurately. Lady Julia went to her son’s room last night and 
found it empty. She came downstairs to look for him, but did 
not find him. This morning she hears of the theft, and she also 
hears that her son declares that he went straight to his roomand — 
never left it. That, she knows, is not true. And she knows 
something else about her son. She knows that he is weak, that 
he is desperately hard-up for money. She has observed his 
infatuation for Mrs Vanderlyn. The whole thing is clear to her. 
Mrs Vanderlyn has persuaded Reggie to steal the plans. But 
she determines to play her part also. She will tackle Reggie, get 
hold of the papers and return them.” 


112 


“But the whole thing is quite impossible,’ cried Lord 
Mayfield. 

“Yes, it is impossible, but Lady Julia does not know that. She 
does not know what I, Hercule Poirot, know, that young 
Reggie Carrington was not stealing papers last night, but 
instead was philandering with Mrs Vanderlyn’s French maid.” 

‘The whole thing is a mare’s nest!’ 


“And the case is not ended at all!’ 

“Yes, itis ended. I, Hercule Poirot, know the truth. You do not 
believe me? You did not believe me yesterday when I said I 
knew where the plans were. But I did know. They were very 
close at hand.’ 

‘Where?’ 

‘They were in your pocket, my lord.’ 

There was a pause, then Lord Mayfield said: 

‘Do you really know what you are saying, M. Poirot?’ 

“Yes, I know. I know that I am speaking toa very clever man. 
From the first it worried me that you, who were admittedly 
short-sighted, should be so positive about the figure you had 
seen leaving the window. You wanted that solution - the 
convenient solution - to be accepted. Why? Later, one by one, 
I eliminated everyone else. Mrs Vanderlyn was upstairs, Sir 
George was with you on the terrace, Reggie Carrington was 
with the French girl on the stairs, Mrs Macatta was blamelessly 
in her bedroom. (It is next to the housekeeper’s room, and Mrs 

_ Macatta snores!) Lady Julia clearly believed her son guilty. So 
there remained only two possibilities. Either Carlile did not put 
the papers on the desk but into his own pocket (and that is not 
reasonable, because, as you pointed out, he could have taken a 
tracing of them), or else - or else the plans were there when you 
walked over to the desk, and the only place they could have 
gone was into your pocket. In that case everything was clear. 
Your insistence on the figure you had seen, your insistence on 
Carlile’s innocence, your disinclination to have me summoned. 

“One thing did puzzle me - the motive. You were, I was 
convinced, an honest man, a man of integrity. That showed in 


113 


your anxiety that no innocent person should be suspected. It 
was also obvious that the theft of the plans might easily affect 
your career unfavourably. Why, then, this wholly unreason- 
able theft? And at last the answer came to me. The crisis in your 
career, some years ago, the assurances given to the world by the 
Prime Minister that you had had no negotiations with the 
power in question. Suppose that that was not strictly true, that 
there remained some record ~ a letter, perhaps - showing that 
in actual fact you had done what you had publicly denied. Such 
a denial was necessary in the interests of public policy. But it is 
doubtful if the man in the street would see it that way. It might 
mean that at the moment when supreme power might be given 
into your hands, some stupid echo from the past would undo 
everything. 

‘I suspect that that letter has been preserved in the hands of 
a certain government, that that government offered to trade 
with you - the letter in exchange for the plans of the new 
bomber. Some men would have refused. You - did not! You 
agreed, Mrs Vanderlyn was the agent in the matter. She came 
here by arrangement to make the exchange. Yougave yourself 
away when you admitted that you had formed no definite 
stratagem for entrapping her. That admission made your 
reason for inviting her here incredibly weak. 

‘You arranged the robbery. Pretended to see the thief on the 
terrace - thereby clearing Carlile of suspicion. Even if he had 
not left the room, the desk was so near the window that a thief 
might have taken the plans while Carlile was busy at the safe 
with his back turned. You walked over to the desk, took the 
plans and kept them on your own person until the moment 
when, by prearranged plan, you slipped them into Mrs 
Vanderlyn’s dressing-case. In return she handed you the fatal 
letter disguised as an unposted letter of her own.’ 

Poirot stopped. 

Lord Mayfield said: 

“Your knowledge is very complete, M. Poirot. You must 
think me an unutterable skunk.” 

Poirot made a quick gesture. 


114 


