The Chocolate Box 


“J didn’t quite mean that,” I said. “I meant, had you ever 
been completely down and out over a case through your own 
fault?” 

“Ah, Icomprehend! You ask if | have ever made the complete 
prize ass of myself, as you say over here? Once, my friend—" 
Aslow, reflective smile hovered over his face. “Yes, once I made 
a fool of myself.” 

He sat up suddenly in his chair. 

“See here, my friend, you have, I know, kept a record of my 
little successes. You shall add one more story to the collection, 
the story of a failure!” 

He leaned forward and placed a log on the fire. Then, after 
carefully wiping his hands on a little duster that hung on a nail 
by the fireplace, he leaned back and commenced his story. 

That of which I tell you (said Monsieur Poirot) took place in 
Belgium many years ago. It was at the time of the terrible 
struggle in France between church and state. Monsieur Paul 
Deéroulard was a French deputy of note, It was an open secret 
that the portfolio of a Minister awaited him. He was among the 
bitterest of the anti-Catholic party, and it was certain that on his 
accession to power, he would have to face violent enmity. He 
was in many ways a peculiar man. Though he neither drank nor 
smoked, he was nevertheless not so scrupulous in other ways. 
You comprehend, Hastings, c’était des femmes—toujours des 
femmes! 

He had married some years earlier a young lady from Brussels 
who had brought him a substantial dot. Undoubtedly the money 
was useful to him in his career, as his family was not rich, though 
on the other hand he was entitled to call himself Monsieur le 
Baron if he chose. There were no children of the marriage, and 
his wife died after two years—the result of a fall downstairs. 
Among the property which she bequeathed to him was a house 
on the Avenue Louise in Brussels. 

Tt was in this house that his sudden death took place, the 
event coinciding with the resignation of the Minister whose 
portfolio he was to inherit. All the papers printed long notices 
of his carcer. His death, which had taken place quite suddenly 
in the evening after dinner, was attributed to heart failure. 


123 


The Chocolate Box 


The poor child was almost beside herself. She would have 
knelt to me. I soothed her as best I could. 

“[ will help you, mademoiselle. I feel almost sure that your 
fears are unfounded, but we will see. First, I will ask you to 
describe to me the inmates of the house.” 

“There are the domestics, of course, Jeannette, Félicie, and 
Denise the cook. She has been there many years; the others are 
simple country girls. Also there is Francois, but he too is an old 
servant. Then there is Monsieur Déroulard’s mother who lived 
with him, and myself. My name is Virginie Mesnard. ama poor 
cousin of the late Madame Déroulard, Monsieur Paul’s wife, and 
Thave been a member of their ménage for over three years. I 
have now described to you the household. There were also two 
guests staying in the house.” 

“And they were?” 

“Monsieur de Saint Alard, a neighbour of Monsieur Dérou- 
lard’s in France. Also an English friend, Mr. John Wilson.” 

“Are they still with you?” 

“Mr. Wilson, yes, but Monsieur de Saint Alard departed yes- 
terday.” 

“And what is your plan, Mademoiselle Mesnard?” 

“If you will present yourself at the house in half an hour’s 
time, I will have arranged some story to account for your pres- 
ence. I had better represent you to be connected with journal- 
ism in some way. I shall say you have come from Paris, and that 
you haye brought a card of introduction from Monsieur de Saint 
‘Alard. Madame Déroulard is very feeble in health, and will pay 
little attention to details.” 

On Mademoiselle’s ingenious pretext I was admitted to the 
house, and after a brief interview with the dead deputy’s 
mother, who was a wonderfully imposing and aristocratic figure 
though obviously in failing health, I was made free of the prem- 
ises. 

I wonder, my friend (continued Poirot), whether you can 
possibly figure to yourself the difficulties of my task? Here was 
aman whose death had taken place three days previously. If 
there had been foul play, only one possibility was admittable— 
poison! And I had had no chance of seeing the body, and there 


125 


Hercule Poirot’s Early Cases 


was no possibility of examining, or analyzing, any medium in 
which the poison could have been administered. There were no 
clues, false or otherwise, to consider. Had the man been poi- 
soned? Had he died a natural death? I, Hercule Poirot, with 
nothing to help me, had to decide. 

First, I interviewed the domestics, and with their aid, 1 
recapitulated the evening. I paid especial notice to the food at 
dinner, and the method of serving it. The soup had been served 
by Monsieur Déroulard himself from a tureen. Next a dish of 
cutlets, then a chicken. Finally a compote of fruits. And all 
placed on the table, and served by Monsieur himself. The coffee 
was brought ina big pot to the dinner table. Nothing there, mon 
ami—impossible to poison one without poisoning all! 

After dinner Madame Déroulard had retired to her own 
apartments and Mademoiselle Virginie had accompanied her. 
The three men had adjourned to Monsieur Déroulard’s study. 
Here they had chatted amicably for some time, when suddenly, 
without any warning, the deputy had fallen heavily to the 
ground. Monsieur de Saint Alard had rushed out and told Fran- 
ois to fetch a doctor immediately. He said it was without doubt 
an apoplexy, explained the man. But when the doctor arrived, 
the patient was past help. 

Mr. John Wilson, to whom I was presented by Mademoiselle 
Virginie, was what was known in those days as a regular John 
Bull Englishman, middle-aged and burly. His account, deliv- 
ered in very British French, was substantially the same. 

“Déroulard went very red in the face, and down he fell.” 

There was nothing further to be found out there. Next I went 
to the scene of the tragedy, the study, and was left alone there 
at my own request, So far there was nothing to support 
Mademoiselle Mesnard’s theory. I could not but believe that it 
was a delusion on her part. Evidently she had entertained a 
romantic passion for the dead man which had not permitted 
her to take a normal view of the case. Nevertheless, I searched 
the study with meticulous care. It was just possible that a hypo- 
dermic needle might have been introduced into the dead man’s 
chair in such a way as to allow of a fatal injection. The minute 
puncture it would cause was likely to remain unnoticed. But I 


196 


The Chocolate Box 


could discover no sign to support that theory. I flung myself 
down in the chair with a gesture of despair. 

*“Enfin. | abandon it!” I said aloud. “There is not a clue any- 
wherel Everything is perfectly normal.” 

As I said the words, my eyes fell on a large box of chocolates 
standing on a table nearby, and my heart gave a leap. It might 
not be a clue to Monsieur Déroulard’s death, but here at least 
was something that was not normal. | lifted the lid. The box was 
full, untouched; not a chocolate was missing—but that only 
made the peculiarity that had caught my eye more striking. 
For, see you, Hastings, while the box itself was pink, the lid was 
blue. Now, one often sees a blue ribbon on a pink box, and vice 
versa, but a box of one colour, and a lid of another—no, decid- 
edly—ca ne se voit jamais! 

I did not as yet see that this little incident was of any use to 
me, yet I determined to investigate it as being out of the ordi- 
nary. I rang the bell for Francois, and asked him if his late 
master had been fond of sweets. A faint melancholy smile came 
to his lips. 

“Passionately fond of them, monsieur. He would always have 
a box of chocolates in the house. He did not drink wine of any 
kind, you see.” 

“Yet this box has not been touched?” I lifted the lid to show 
him. 

“Pardon, monsieur, but that was a new box purchased on the 
day of his death, the other being nearly finished.” 

“Then the other box was finished on the day of his death,” I 
said slowly. 

“Yes, monsieur, I found it empty in the morning and threw 
it away.” 

“Did Monsieur Déroulard eat sweets at all hours of the day?” 

“Usually after dinner, monsieur.” 

I began to see light. 

“Frangois,” I said, “you can be discreet?” 

“If there is need, monsieur.” 

“Bon! Know, then, that I am of the police. Can you find me 
that other box?” 

“Without doubt, monsieur. Tt will be in the dustbin.” 


Hercule Poirot's Early Cases 


He departed and returned in a few minutes with a dust- 
covered object. It was the duplicate of the box I held, save for 
the fact that this time the box was blue and the lid was pink. 
I thanked Frangois, recommended him once more to be dis- 
creet, and left the house in the Avenue Louise without more 
ado. 

Next I called upon the doctor who had attended Monsieur 
Déroulard. With him I had a difficult task. He entrenched him- 
self prettily behind a wall of learned phraseology, but I fancied 
that he was not quite as sure about the case as he would like to 
be. 

“There have been many curious occurrences of the kind,” he 
observed, when I had managed to disarm him somewhat. “A 
sudden fit of anger, a violent emotion—after a heavy dinner, 
c'est entendu—then, with an access of rage, the blood flies to 
the head, and pst/—there you are!” 

“But Monsicur Déroulard had had no violent emotion.” 

“No? I made sure that he had been having a stormy alterca- 
tion with Monsieur de Saint Alard.” 

“Why should he?” 

“C'est évident!” The doctor shrugged his shoulders. “Was not 
Monsieur de Saint Alard a Catholic of the most fanatical? Their 
friendship was being ruined by this question of church and 
state. Not a day passed without discussions. To Monsieur de 
Saint Alard, Déroulard appeared almost as Antichrist.” 

This was unexpected, and gave me food for thought. 

“One more question, Doctor: would it be possible to in- 
troduce a fatal dose of poison into a chocolate?” 

“It would be possible, I suppose,” said the doctor slowly. 
“Pure prussic acid would mect the case if there were no chance 
of evaporation, and a tiny globule of anything might be swal- 
lowed unnoticed—but it does not seem a very likely supposi- 
tion. A chocolate full of morphine or strychnine—” He made a 
wry face. “You comprehend, Monsieur Poirot—one bite would 
be enough! The unwary one would not stand upon ceremony.” 

“Thank you, Monsieur le Docteur.”” 

I withdrew. Next I made inquiries of the chemists, especially 
those in the neighbourhood of the Avenue Louise. It is good to 


128 


The Chocolate Box 


be of the police. I got the information I wanted without any 
trouble. Only in one case could I hear of any poison having been 
supplied to the house in question. This was some eye drops of 
atropine sulphate for Madame Déroulard. Atropine is a potent 
poison, and for the moment I was elated, but the symptoms of 
atropine poisoning are closely allied to those of ptomaine, and 
bear no resemblance to those I was studying. Besides, the pre- 
scription was an old one. Madame Deéroulard had suffered from 
cataract in both eyes for many years. 

I was turning away discouraged when the chemist’s voice 
called me back. 

“Un moment, Monsieur Poirot. | remember, the girl who 
brought that prescription, she said something about having to 
go to the English chemist. You might try there.” 

I did. Once more enforcing my official status, I got the infor- 
mation I wanted. On the day before Monsieur Déroulard’s 
death they had made up a prescription for Mr. John Wilson. Not 
that there was any making up about it. They were simply little 
tablets of trinitrin. 1 asked if I might see some. He showed me 
them, and my heart beat faster—for the tiny tablets were of 
chocolate. 

“Tt is a poison?” I asked. 

“No, monsieur. 

“Can you describe to me its effect?” 

“Tt lowers the blood pressure. It is given for some forms of 
heart trouble—angina pectoris for instance. It relieves the ar- 
terial tension, In arteriosclerosis—” 

L interrupted him. “Ma foi! This rigmarole says nothing to 
me. Does it cause the face to flush?” 

“Certainly it does.” 

“And supposing I ate ten—twenty of your little tablets. What 
then?” 

“I should not advise you to attempt it,” he replied drily. 

“And yet you say it is not poison?” 

“There are many things not called poison which can kill a 
man,” he replied as before. 

T left the shop elated. At last, things had begun to march! 

I now knew that John Wilson held the means for the crime 


129 


Hercule Poirot's Karly Cases 


—but what about the motive? He had come to Belgium on 
business, and had asked Monsieur Déroulard, whom he knew 
slightly, to put him up. There was apparently no way in which 
Déroulard’s death could benefit him. Moreover, I discovered by 
inquiries in England that he had suffered for some years from 
that painful form of heart disease known as angina. Therefore 
he had a genuine right to have those tablets in his possession. 
Nevertheless, | was convinced that someone had gone to the 
chocolate box, opening the full one first by mistake, and had 
abstracted the contents of the last chocolate, cramming in in- 
stead as many little trinitrin tablets as it would hold. The choco- 
lates were large ones. Between twenty or thirty tablets, I felt 
sure, could have been inserted, But who had done this? 

There were two guests in the house. John Wilson had the 
means. Saint Alard had the motive. Remember, he was a 
fanatic, and there is no fanatic like a religious fanatic. Could he, 
by any means, have got hold of John Wilson’s trinitrin? 

Another little idea came to me. Ah! You smile at my little 
ideas! Why had Wilson run out of trinitrin? Surely he would 
bring an adequate supply from England. I called once more at 
the house in the Avenue Louise. Wilson was out, but I saw the 
girl who did his room, Félicie. | demanded of her immediately 
whether it was not true that Monsieur Wilson had lost a bottle 
from his washstand some little time ago. The girl responded 
eagerly. It was quite true. She, Félicie, had been blamed for it. 
The English gentleman had evidently thought that she had 
broken it, and did not like to say so, Whereas she had never 
even touched it. Without doubt it was Jeannette—always nosing 
round where she had no business to be— 

I calmed the flow of words, and took my leave. I knew now 
all that I wanted to know. It remained for me to prove my case. 
That, | felt, would not be easy. J might be sure that Saint Alard 
had removed the bottle of trinitrin from John Wilson’s wash- 
stand, but to convince others, I would have to produce evi- 
dence. And I had none to produce! 

Never mind. | knew—that was the great thing. You remem- 
ber our difficulty in the Styles case, Hastings? There again, I 
knew—but it took me a long time to find the last link which 


130 


The Chocolate Box 


made my chain of evidence against the murderer complete. 

1 asked for an interview with Mademoiselle Mesnard. She 
came at once, I demanded of her the address of Monsieur de 
Saint Alard. A look of trouble came over her face. 

“Why do you want it, monsieur?” 

“Mademoiselle, it is necessary.” 

She seemed doubtful—troubled. 

“He can tell you nothing. He is a man whose thoughts are not 
in this world. He hardly notices what goes on around him.” 

“Possibly, mademoiselle. Nevertheless, he was an old friend 
of Monsieur Déroulard’s. There may be things he can tell me 
—things of the past—old grudges—old love affairs.” 

The girl flushed and bit her lip. “As you please—but—but— 
T feel sure now that I have been mistaken. It was good of you 
to accede to my demand, but I was upset—almost distraught at 
the time. I see now that there is no mystery to solve. Leave it, 
I beg of you, monsieur.”” 

T eyed her closely. 

“Mademoiselle,” I said, “it is sometimes difficult for a dog to 
find a scent, but once he has found it, nothing on earth will 
make him leave it! That is if he is a good dog! And I, mademoi- 
selle, I, Hercule Poirot, am a very good dog.” 

Without a word she turned away. A few minutes later she 
returned with the address written on a sheet of paper. I left the 
house. Frangois was waiting for me outside. He looked at me 
anxiously. 

“There is no news, monsieur?” 

“None as yet, my friend.” 

“Ah Pauvre Monsieur Déroulard!” he sighed. “I too was of 
his way of thinking. | do not care for priests. Not that I would 
say so in the house. The women are all devout—a good thing 
perhaps. Madame est trés pieuse—et Mademoiselle Virginie 
aussi.” 

Mademoiselle Virginie? Was she “trés pieuse”? Thinking of 
the tear-stained passionate face I had seen that first day, I won- 
dered. 

Having obtained the address of Monsieur de Saint Alard, 1 
wasted no time. I arrived in the neighbourhood of his chiteau 


131 


Hercule Poirot's Early Cases 


in the Ardennes but it was some days before I could find a 
pretext for gaining admission to the house. In the end I did— 
how do you think?—as a plumber, mon ami! It was the affair of 
a moment to arrange a neat little gas leak in his bedroom. I 
departed for my tools, and took care to return with them at an 
hour when I knew I should have the field pretty well to myself. 
‘What I was searching for, I hardly knew. The one thing needful, 
I could not believe there was any chance of finding. He would 
never have run the risk of keeping it. 

Still when I found a little cupboard above the washstand 
locked, I could not resist the temptation of seeing what was 
inside it. The lock was quite a simple one to pick. The door 
swung open. It was full of old bottles. I took them up one by one 
with a trembling hand. Suddenly, I uttered a cry. Figure to 
yourself, my friend, I held in my hand a little phial with an 
English chemist’s label. On it were the words: “Trinitrin Tab- 
lets, One to be taken when required. Mr. John Wilson.” 

I controlled my emotion, closed the little cupboard, slipped 
the bottle into my pocket, and continued to repair the gas leak! 
One must be methodical. Then I left the chateau and took train 
for my own country as soon as possible. | arrived in Brussels late 
that night. I was writing out a report for the préfet in the 
morning, when a note was brought to me. It was from old 
Madame Deroulard, and it summoned me to the house in the 
Avenue Louise without delay. 

Francois opened the door to me. 

“Madame la Boronne is waiting you.” 

He conducted me to her apartments. She satin state in a large 
armchair. There was no sign of Mademoiselle Virginie. 

“Monsieur Poirot,” said the old lady. “I have just learned that 
you are not what you pretend to be. You are a police officer.” 

“That is so, madame.” 

“You came here to inquire into the circumstances of my son's 
death?” 

Again | replied: “That is so, madame.” 

“I should be glad if you would tell me what progress you have 
made.” 

[ hesitated. 


132 


Hercule Poirot's Early Cases 


She closed her eyes for a moment. “You cannot conceive, 
monsieur, of my agony, my despair. What was I to do? De- 
nounce him to the police? I could not bring myself to do it. It 
was my duty, but my flesh was weak. Besides, would they be- 
lieve me? My eyesight had been failing for some time—they 
would say I was mistaken. I kept silence. But my conscience 
gave me no peace. By keeping silence I too was amurderer. My 
son inherited his wife’s money. He flourished as the green bay 
tree. And now he was to have a Minister’s portfolio. His persecu- 
tion of the church would be redoubled. And there was Virginie. 
She, poor child, beautiful, naturally pious, was fascinated by 
him. He had a strange and terrible power over women. I saw 
it coming. I was powerless to prevent it. He had no intention 
of marrying her. The time came when she was ready to yield 
everything to him. 

“Then I saw my path clear. He was my son. I had given him 
life. I was responsible for him. He had killed one woman's body, 
now he would kill another's soul! I went to Mr. Wilson's room 
and took the bottle of tablets. He had once said laughingly that 
there were enough in it to kill a man! I went into the study and 
opened the big box of chocolates that always stood on the table. 
Topened a new box by mistake. The other was on the table also. 
‘There was just one chocolate left in it. That simplified things. 
No one ate chocolates except my son and Virginie. I would keep 
her with me that night. All went as I had planned—" 

She paused, closing her eyes a minute, then opened them 
again. 

“Monsieur Poirot, [am in your hands, They tell me [have not 
many days to live. I am willing to answer for my action before 
the good God. Must I answer for it on earth also?” 

I hesitated. “But the empty bottle, madame,” I said to gain 
time. “How came that into Monsieur de Saint Alard’s posses- 
sion?” 

“When he came to say goodbye to me, monsieur, I slipped it 
into his pocket. I did not know how to get rid of it. am so infirm 
that [ cannot move about much without help, and finding it 
empty in my rooms might have caused suspicion. You under- 
stand, monsieur—" she drew herself up to her full height—“it 
134 


The Chocolate Box 


was with no idea of casting suspicion on Monsieur de Saint 
Alard! I never dreamed of such a thing. I thought his valet 
would find an empty bottle and throw it away without ques- 
tion.” 

IT bowed my head. “I comprehend, madame," I said. 

“And your decision, monsieur?” 

Her voice was firm and unfaltering, her head held as high as 
ever. 

rose to my feet. 

“Madame,” I said, “I have the honour to wish you good day. 
1 have made my investigations—and failed! The matter is 
closed.” 

He was silent for a moment, then said quietly: “She died just 
aweek later. Mademoiselle Virginie passed through her noviti- 
ate, and duly took the veil. That, my friend, is the story. I must 
admit that I do not make a fine figure in it.” 

“But that was hardly a failure,” I expostulated. “What else 
could you have thought under the circumstances?” 

“Ah, sacré, mon ami,” cried Poirot, becoming suddenly ani- 
mated, “Is it that you do not see? But I was thirty-six times an 
idiot! My grey cells, they functioned not at all. The whole time 
Thad the true clue in my hands.” 

“What clue?” 

“The chocolate box! Do you not see? Would anyone in posses- 
sion of their full eyesight make such a mistake? I knew Madame 
Déroulard had cataract—the atropine drops told me that. 
There was only one person in the household whose eyesight was 
such that she could not see which lid to replace. It was the 
chocolate box that started me on the track, and yet up to the 
end I failed consistently to perceive its real significance! 

“Also my psychology was at fault. Had Monsieur de Saint 
Alard been the criminal, he would never have kept an incrimi- 
nating bottle. Finding it was a proof of his innocence. I had 
learned already from Mademoiselle Virginie that he was ab- 
sent-minded. Altogether it was a miserable affair that I have 
recounted to you there! Only to you have I told the story. You 
comprehend, I do not figure well in it! An old lady commits a 
rime in such a simple and clever fashion that I, Hercule Poirot, 


135 


