n 

K -f 

-v:  I*-. 


• • • 


nts  Can 


featuriit’ciHercwIcPoiro^  § 
c CmM(*y  - The  new  )it>ik  miies 


•' 

W t,/’ 


A MEMORY 
OF  MURDER 


The  extraordinary  story  told  to  a middle-aged 
woman  at  a .fashionable  London  party  ...  the 
terrifying  tale  told  by  a very  old  lady  in  her  crum- 
bling manor  house . . . the  shocking  revelations  of 
a sophisticated  schoolmistress  in  Switzerland  . . . 
the  strange  diagnosis  given  by  a great  doctor  of  a 
death  long  past — 

.Indomitably,  Hercule  Poirot  followed  these  clues, 
■searching  for  the  key  that  would  release  a 
beautiful  young  girl  from  the  threat  of  madness 
and  her  lover  from  an  abyss  of  despair.  The  inimi- 
table detective  was  determined  that  love  should 
triumph  over  fearful  odds—no  matter  how  far  he 
had  to  travel  to  corner  the  elusive  truth  and  write 
the  final  chapter  to  a sinister  saga  of  relentless 
hatred. 


Other  Agatha  Christie  Titles  Currently  Availabl 
Dell  Editions 

APPOINTMENT  WITH  DEATH  0246 
THE  BIG  FOUR  0562 
THE  BOOMERANG  CLUE  0704 
CARDS  ON  THE  TABLE  1052 
ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER  2329 
THE  MAN  IN  THE  BROWN  SUIT  523( 
' MISTER  PARKER  PYNB,  DE  IEC  I IVE  5l 

THE  MOVING  FINGER  5861 
MURDER  AFTER  HOURS  5922 
MURDER  AT  HAZELMOOR  5.940 
MURDER  AT  THE  VICARAGE  5946 

MURDER  IN  MESOPO  TAMIA  5982 

MURDER  IN  RETROSi’Ecrr  6030 
THE  MYSTERIOUS  MR.  QUIN  6246 
PARTNERS  IN  CRIME  6848 
POIROT  LOSES  A CLIEN  T 6984 
THE  REGATTA  MYSTERY  7336 
SAD  CYPRESS  7S52 
THE  SECRET  OF  CHIMNEYS  7708 
SURPRISE!  SURPRISE!  8389 
THERE  IS  A TIDE  8692 
13  AT  DINNER  8742 
13  CLUES  FOR  MISS  MARPLK  8755 
THE  UNDER  DOG  AND  OTHER  STORIES  ! 


€L€PHANTS 

CAN 

RCMCMBCR 


AGATHA  CHRISTie 


A DELL  BOOK 


Published  by 

DELLPUBLlSHINii’a).,  INC 
1 Dag  HammarslijtiUi  Phi/a 
New  York.  New  York  Kioi? 


All  rights  rcsrrvi-d. 

Copyright  © Agatliii  C’hrisik*  I (d„  Jdyj 
_ No  part  of  this  book  may  be  tefao’dmrd 
many  form  without  permission  in  vvriti,,,,  trom 
Dodd,  Mead  & Cmpitny.  New  V.,,  k.  s y J 
Dell  ® TM  681510.  Dell  Publishing  < I. . 

„ ISBN;  0440-12329-^1 


Wllfl 

^ Dodd,  Mead  <|  Caiimiiiiv 

Prmted  inthe  United  States  nf  A, ncrica 

Previous}  Dell  Hdicis^i  #2329 
Four  print Irigsf 


New  Dell  Bdiikm 
Firsit  printing».«-j||if|yj^|.^,  |ilgll 

Second  primmg-*iii!ic 


TO  MOLLY  MYERS 
ill  return  for  many  kindnesses 


*y 


CONTENTS 


1.  A Literary  I.uncheon 

2.  First  Mentioa  of  Elephants 


Book  I 
ELEPHANTS 

3.  Great-aunt  Alice’s  Guide  to  Knowledge 

4.  Celia 

5.  Old  Sins  Have  Long  Shadows 

6.  An  Old  Friend  Remembers 

7.  Back  to  the  Nursery 

8.  Mrs.  Oliver  at  Work 

9.  Results  of  Elephantine  Research 

10.  Desmond 


Book  11 

LONG  SHADOWS 


11. 

Superintendent  Garroway  and  Poirot 

Compare  Notes 

147 

12. 

Celia  Meets  Hercule  Poirot 

153 

13. 

Mrs.  Burton-Cox 

163 

14. 

Dr.  Willoughby 

176 

15. 

Eugene  and  Rosentelle,  Hair  Stylists  and 

Beauticians 

185 

16. 

Mr.  Goby  Reports 

191 

17. 

Poirot  Announces  Departure 

198 

18. 

Interlude 

203 

19. 

Maddy  and  Z61ie 

205 

20. 

Court  of  Inquiry 

220 

Elephants  Can  Remember 


A LITERARi  LUNCHEON 


Mrs.  Oliver  looked  at  herself  in  the  glass.  She  gave  a 
brief,  sideways  look  towards  the  clock  on  the  mantel- 
piece, which  she  had  some  idea  was  twenty  minutes 
slow.  Then  she  resumed  her  study  of  her  coiffure.  ITie 
trouble  wth  Mrs.  Oliver  was — and  sho  admitted  it 
freely— that  her  styles  of  hairdreasing  were  always  be- 
ing changed.  She  had  tried  almost  everything  in  turn. 
A .severe  pompadour  at  one  time,  then  a wind-swept 
style  where  you  brushed  back  your  kx:ks  to  display  an 
intellectual  brow,  at  lea.st  she  hoped  the  brow  was  in- 
tellectual, She  had  tried  tightly  arranged  curls,  she  had 
tried  a kind  of  artistic  disarray.  She  had  to  admit  that 
it  did  not  matter  very  much  today  what  her  type  of 
hairdressing  wa.*?,  because  today  she  was  going  to  do 
what  she  very  seldom  did— wear  a hat. 

11 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBES 

On  the  top  shelf  of  Mrs.  Oliver’s  wardrobe  there  re- 
posed four  hats.  One  was  definitely  allotted  to  wed- 
dings. When  you  went  to  a wedding,  a hat  was  a “must.” 
But  even  then  Mrs.  Oliver  kept  two.  One,  in  a round 
bandbox,  was  of  feathers.  It  fitted  closely  to  the  head 
and  stood  up  very  well  to  sudden  squalls  of  rain  if  they 
should  overtake  one  unexpectedly  as  one  pa.sscd  from 
a car  to  the  interior  of  the  sacred  edifice,  or  as  so  often 
nowadays,  a registrar’s  office. 

The  other,  and  more  elaborate,  hat  was  definitely  for 
attending  a wedding  held  on  a Saturday  afternoon  in 
summer.  It  had  flowers  and  chiffon  and  a covering  of 
yellow  net  attached  with  mimosa. 

The  other  two  hats  on  the  shelf  were  of  a more  all- 
purpose character.  One  was  what  Mrs.  Oliver  called 
her  country  house  hat,  made  of  tan  felt  .suitable  for 
wearing  with  tweeds  of  almost  any  pattern,  with  a be- 
coming brim  that  yon  could  turn  up  or  turn  down. 

Mrs.  Oliver  had  a cashmere  pullover  for  warmth 
and  a thin  pullover  for  hot  days,  cither  of  which  was 
suitable  in  color  to  go  with  this.  However,  tliough  the 
pullovers  were  frequently  worn,  the  hat  was  practically 
never  worn.  Because,  really,  why  put  on  a hat  just  to 
go  to  the  country  and  have  a meal  with  your  friends? 

The  fourth  hat  was  the  most  expensive  of  the  lot  and 
it  had  extraordinary  advantages  about  it,  Pos.sibIy,  Mrs. 
Oliver  sometimes  thought,  because  it  was  so  expensivo. 
It  consisted  of  a kind  of  turban  of  various  layers  of 
contrasting  velvets,  all  of  rather  bca>nung  pastel 
shades  which  would  go  with  anything. 

^ Mrs.  Oliver  paused  in  doubt  and  then  called  for  as- 
sistance. 

“Maria,”  she  said,  then  louder,  “Marla.  Come  here 
a .minute.” 

^ Maria  came.  She  was  used  to  being  asked  lo  give  nd*  ' 

, n 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

vice  on  what  Mrs.  Oliver  was  thinking  of  wearing. 

“Going  to  wear  your  lovely  smart  hat,  are  you?” 
said  Maria. 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  wanted  to  know  whether 
you  think  it  looks  best  this  way  or  the  other  way 
round.” 

Maria  stood  back  and  took  a look. 

“Well,  tliat’s  back  to  front  you’re  wearing  it  now, 
isn’t  it?” 

“Yes,  I know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  know  that 
quite  well.  But  I thought  somehow  it  looked  better  that 
way.” 

“Oh,  why  should  it?”  said  Maria. 

“Well,  it’s  meant,  I suppose.  But  it’s  got  to  be  meant 
by  me  as  well  as  the  shop  that  sold  it,”  said  Mrs. 
OUver. 

“Why  do  you  think  it’s  better  the  wrong  way 
round?” 

“Because  you  get  that  lovely  shade  of  blue  and  the 
dark  brown,  and  I think  that  looks  better  than  the  other 
way,  which  is  green  with  the  reil  and  the  chocolate 
color.” 

At  this  point  Mrs.  Oliver  removed  the  hat,  put  it  on 
again  and  tried  it  wrong  way  round,  right  way  round 
and  sideways,  which  both  she  and  Maria  disapproved 
of. 

“You  can’t  have  it  the  wide  way.  I mean,  it’s  wrong 
for  your  face,  isn’t  it?  It’d  be  wrong  for  anyone's  face.” 

“No.  That  won’t  do.  I think  I’ll  have  it  the  right  way 
round,  after  all.” 

“Well,  I think  it’s  safer  always,”  said  Maria. 

Mrs,  Oliver  took  off  the  hat.  Maria  assisted  her  to 
put  on  a wdl-cut,  thin  woolen  dress  of  a delicate  puce 
color,  and  helped  her  to  adjust  the  hat. 

“You  look  ever  so  smart,”  smd  Maria. 


13 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


That  was  what  Mrs.  Oliver  liked  so  much  about 
Maria.  If  given  the  least  excuse  for  saying  so,  she  al- 
ways  approved  and  gave  praise. 

“Going  to  make  a speech  at  the  luncheon,  are  you?” 
Maria  asked. 

“A  speech!”  Mrs.  Oliver  sounded  horrifie<}.  “No,  of 
course  not.  You  know  I never  make  speeches.” 

“Well,  I thought  they  always  did  at  these  here  liter- 
. ary  luncheons.  That’s  what  you’re  going  to,  isn’t  it? 
Famous  writers  of  nineteen  seventy-three- -or  wher- 
ever year  it  is  we’ve  got  td  now.” 

“I  don’t  need  to  make  a speech,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

, “Several  other  people  who  like  doing  it  will  be  making 
^eeches,  and  they  are  much  better  at  it  than  I would 
be.” 


“Fm  sure  you’d  make  a lovely  speech  if  you  put 
your  mind  to  it,”  said  Maria,  adjusting  hensclf  to  the 
role  of  a tempter. 

“No,*  I shouldn’t,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  "I  know  what  I 
can  do  and  I know  what  I can’t.  I can’t  make  specche.s. 
I get  all  worried  and  nervy  and  I should  probably  stam- 
mer or  say  the  same  thing  twice.  1 should  not  tnily  fed 
silly,  I should  probably  look  silly.  Now  it’s  all  right  with 
words.  You  can  writs  words  down  or  speak  them  into  a 
machme  or  dictate  them.  I can  do  things  with  words  so  ! 
long  as  I know  it’s  not  a speech  Fm  making.”  ^ 

everything’ll  go  all  right.  But  Fm 
sure  It  will.  Quite grand  luncheon,  isn’t  it?” 

“ a deeply  dcprcs.sed  voice. 

Quite  a grand  lunch^n.” 

am^PoTn  ^^5?  on  earth 

^ I going  to  It?  She  searched  her  mind  for  a bit  !>c- 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

"I  suppose,”  she  said,  again  to  herself  and  not  x 
Maria,  who  had  had  to  return  rather  hurriedly  to  the 
kitchen,  summoned  by  a smell  of  overflowing  jam 
which  she  happened  to  have  on  the  stove,  “1  wanted  to 
see  what  it  felt  like.  I’m  always  being  asked  to  literary 
^lunches  or  sometMiig  like  that  and  I never  go« 

Mrs.  Oliver  arrived  at  the  last  course  of  the  grand 
luncheon  with  a sigh  of  satisfaction  as  she  toyed  with 
: the  remains  of  the  meringue-  on.  her  plate.  She  was  par- 
ticularly fond  of  meringues  and  it  was  a delicious  last 
course  in  a very  delicious  luncheon.  Nevertheless, 
when  one  reached  middle  age,  one  had  to  be  careful 
with  meringues.  One’s  teeth!  They  looked  all  right, 
they  had  the  great  advantage  that  they  could  not  ache, 
they  were  white  and  quite  agreeable-kxiking — just  like 
the  real  thing.  But  it  was  true  enough  that  they  were 
not  real  teeth.  And  teeth  that  were  not  real  teeth — or 
so  Mrs.  Oliver  believed — were  not  really  of  high-class 
material.  Dogs,  she  had  always  understood,  had  teeth 
of  real  ivory,  but  human  beings  had  teeth  merely  of 
bone.  Or,  she  supposed,  if  they  were  false  teeth,  of 
plastic.  Anyway,  Ae  point  was  that  you  mustn  t get  in- 
volved in  some  rather  shame-making  appearance, 
which  false  teeth  might  lead  you  into.  Lettuce  was  a 
difficulty,  and  salted  almonds,  and  such  things  as  choc- 
olates with  hard  centers,  clinging  caramels  and  the 
delicious  stickiness  and  adherence  of  meringues.  With 
a sigh  of  satisfaction,  she  dealt  with  the  final  mouthful. 
It  had  been  a good  lunch,  a very  good  lunch. 

Mrs.  Oliver  was  fond  of  her  creature  comforts.  She 
had  enjoyed  the  luncheon  very  much.  She  had  en- 
joyed the  company,  too.  The  luncheon,  which  had 
been  given  to  celebrated  female  writers,  had  fortu- 
nately not  been  confined  to  female  writers  only.  There 

i5 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


had  been  other  writers,  and  critics,  and  those  who  read 
books  as  well  as  those  who  wrote  them.  Mrs.  Oliveii 
had  sat  between  two  very  charming  members  of  the 
male  sex.  Edwin  Aubyn,  whose  poetry  she  always  en. 
joyed,  an  extremely  entertaining  person  who  had  had 
various  entertaining  experiences  in  his  tours  abroad, 
and  various  literary  and  personal  adventures.  Also  he 
was  interested  in  restaurants  and  food  and  they  had 
talked  very  happily  about  food,  and  left  the  subject  of 
literature  aside. 

Sir  Wesley  Kent,  on  her  other  side,  had  also  been: 
an  agreeable  lunch  companion.  He  had  said  very  nice 
things  about  her  books,  and  had  had  tiie  tact  to  say 
things  that  did  not  make  her  feel  embarra-ssed,  which! 
so  many  people  could  do  almost  without  trying.  He  had! 
mentioned  one  or  two  reasons  why  he  had  liked  one  or 
other  of  her  books,  and  they  had  been  the  right  rea- 
sons, and  therefore  Mrs.  Oliver  had  thought  favorably 
of  him  for  that  reason.  Praise  from  men,  Mrs.  Oliver 
thought  to  herself,  is  always  acceptable.  It  was  women 
who  gushed.  Some  of  the  things  that  women  wrote  to 
her!  Really!  Not  always  women,  of  course.  Sometimes 
emotional  young  men  from  very  faraway  countries. 
Only  last  week  she  had  received  a fan  letter  begintiing, 
“Reading  your  book,  I feel  what  a noble  woman  you 
must  be.”  After  reading  The  Second  Goldfish  he 
had  then  gone  off  into  an  intense  kind  of  literary  ec- 
which  was,  Mrs.  Oliver  felt,  completely  unfitting. 
She  was  not  unduly  modest  She  thought  the  detective 
stones  she  wrote  were  quite  good  of  their  kind.  Some 
were  not  so  good  and  some  were  mucli  better  than 
others.  But  there  was  no  reason,  so  far  as  .she  cmild 
see,  to  make  anyone  think  she  was  a noble  woman. 
She  was  a lucky  woman  who  had  established  a happy 

16 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


knack  of  writing  what  quite  a lot  of  people  wanted  to 
read.  Wonderful  luck  that  was,  Mrs.  Oliver  tliought  to 
herself. 

Well,  all  things  considered,  she  had  got  through  this 
ordeal  very  well.  She  had  quite  enjoyed  herself,  talked 
to  some  nice  people.  Now  they  were  moving  to  where 
Coffee  was  being  handed  round  and  where  you  could 
change  partners  and  chat  with  other  people.  This  was 
the  moment  of  danger,  as  Mrs,  Oliver  knew  well.  This 
was  now  where  other  women  would  come  and  attack 
her.  Attack  her  with  fulsome  praise,  and  where  she  al- 
ways felt  lamentably  inefficient  at  giving  the  right  an- 
swers because  there  weren’t  really  any  right  answers 
that  you  could  give.  It  went  really  rather  like  a travel 
book  for  going  abroad  with  the  right  phrases. 

Question:  “T  must  tell  you  how  very  fond  I am  of 
reading  your  booLs  and  how  wonderful  I think  they 
arc.” 

Answer  from  flustered  author:  “Well,  that’s  very 
kind.  I am  so  glad.” 

S “You  must  understand  that  Fve  been  waiting  to  meet 
you  for  months.  It  really  is  wonderful.” 

“Oh,  it’s  very  nice  of  you.  Very  nice  indeed.” 

It  went  on  very  much  like  that.  Neither  of  you 
seemed  to  be  able  to  talk  about  anything  of  outside  in- 
terest. It  had  to  be  all  about  your  books,  or  the  other 
woman’s  bcK)ks  if  you  knew  what  her  books  were.  You 
were  in  the  literary  web  and  you  weren’t  good  at  this 
sort  of  stuff.  Some  people  could  do  it,  but  Mrs.  Oliver 
was  bitterly  aware  of  not  having  the  proper  capacity. 
A foreign  friend  of  hers  had  once  put  her,  when  she 
was  staying  at  an  emba.ssy  abroad,  througli  a kind  of 
counsc. 

“1  listen  to  you,”  Albertina  had  said  in  her  charm- 
17 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

ing,  low,  foreign  voice.  “I  have  listened  to  what  you! 
say  to  that  young  man  who  came  from  the  newspaper 
to  interview  you.  You  have  not  got — no!  you  have  not 
got  the  pride  you  should  have  in  your  work.  Yon 
should  say  ‘Yes,  I write  welt.  I write  better  than  any- 
one  else  who  writes  detective  stories.’  ” 

“But  I don’t,”  Mrs.  Oliver  had  said  at  that  moment 
“I’m  not  bad  but — ” 

“Ah,  do  not  say  ‘I  don’t’  like  that.  You  must  say  you 
do;  even  if  you  do  not  tliink  you  do,  you  ought  to  say\ 
you  do.” 

“I  wish,  Albertina,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “that  you  could 
interview  these  journalists  who  come.  You  would  do  it 
so  well.  Can’t  you  pretend  to  be  me  one  day,  and  I’fl 
listen  behind  the  door?” 

“Yes,  I suppose  I could  do  it.  It  would  be  rather 
fun.  But  they  would  know  I was  not  you.  They  know 
your  face.  But  you  must  say  ‘Yes,  yes,  I know  that  I 
^ am  better  than  anyone  else.’  You  must  say  that  to 
* everybody.  They  should  know  it.  d’hey  .should  an- 
nounce it.  Oh,  yes— it  is  terrible  to  hear  yt>u  sitting 
there  and  say  things  as  though  you  apologize  for  what 
you  are.  It  must  not  be  like  that.” 

' It  had  been  rather,  Mrs.  Oliver  tliought,  a.s  thougi 
_ she  had  been  a budding  actress  trying  to  learn  a part, 
and  the  director  had  found  her  hopelessly  bad  Jit  tak- 
ing direction.  Well,  anyway,  there’d  lie  not  much  dif- 
ficulty here.  There’d  be  a few  waiting  females  when 
they  all  got  up  from  the  table.  In  fact,  she  could  see 
one  or  two  hovering  already.  That  wuuUln’i  matter 
much.  She  would  go  and  smile  and  be  nice  and  say, 
“So  kind  of  you.  I’m  so  pleased.  One  is  so  ghui  to 
know  people  like  one’s  books.”  All  the  stale  oUl  things. 
Rather  as  though  you  put  a hand  into  a box  and  look 


18 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

oat  some  useful  words  already  strung  together  lilcc  a 
necklace  of  beads.  And  then,  before  very  long  now, 
she  could  leave. 

Her  eyes  went  round  the  table  because  she  might 
perhaps  see  some  friends  there  as  well  as  would-be  ad- 
mirers. Yes,  she  did  see  in  the  distance  Maurinc 
Grant,  who  was  great  fun.  Tlie  moment  came,  tlic  lit- 
erary women  and  the  attendant  cavaliers  who  had  also 
attended  the  lunch,  rose.  They  streamed  towartls 
chairs,  towards  coffee  tables,  towards  sofas,  and  con- 
fidential corners.  The  moment  of  peril,  Mrs.  Oliver 
often  thought  of  it  to  herself,  though  usually  at  cock- 
tails and  not  literary  parties  because  she  seldom  went 
to  the  latter.  At  any  moment  the  danger  might  arise,  as 
someone  whom  you  did  not  remember  but  who  re- 
membered you,  or  someone  whom  you  definitely  tlid 
not  want  to  talk  to  but  whom  you  found  y<m  could  m»t 
avoid.  In  this  case  it  was  the  first  dilemma  that  came  to 
her.  A large  woman.  Ample  proportions,  large  white 
champing  teeth-  What  in  French  could  have  been 
called  une  femme  formidable,  but  who  delinitcly  had 
not  only  the  French  variety  of  being  formidable,  but 
the  English  one  of  being  supremely  bos.sy.  Ohvicnisly 
she  either  knew  Mrs.  Oliver,  or  was  intent  mi  making 
her  acquaintance  there  and  then.  The  last  wa.s  liow  it 
happened  to  go. 

“Oh,  Mrs.  Oliver,”  she  said  in  a high-pitched  voice. 
“What  a pleasure  to  meet  you  today.  I have  wanted  tc> 
for  so  long.  I simply  adore  your  books.  .So  does  my  son. 
And  my  husband  used  to  insist  on  never  traveling  with- 
out at  least  two  of  your  books.  But  come,  do  sit  tiown. 
There  arc  so  many  things  I want  to  ask  you  about.” 

Oh,  well,  thought  Mrs.  Oliver,  not  my  favorite  type 
of  woman,  this.  But  as  well  her  as  any  otlier. 


19 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

She  allowed  herself  to  be  conducted  in  a firm  way, 
rather  as  a police  officer  might  have  done.  She  was  tat 
en  to  a settee  for  two  across  a comer,  and  her  new 
friend  accepted  cofiee  and  placed  coffee  before  her 
also. 

“There.  Now  we  are  settled.  I don’t  suppose  you 
know  my  name.  I am  Mrs.  Burton-Cox.”  ' 

“Oh  yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  embarrassed,  as  usualj 
Mrs.  Burton-Cox?  Did  she  write  books  also?  No,  she 
couldn’t  really  remember  anything  about  her.  But  she 
seemed  to  have  heard  the  name.  A faint  thought  came 
to  her.  A book  on  politics,  something  like  that?  Not  fio- 
tion,  not  fun,  not  crime.  Perhaps  a high-crow  intclleo. 
tual  with  political  bias?  That  ought  to  be  easy,  Mrs, 
Oliver  thought  with  relief.  I can  just  let  her  talk  and 
say,  “How  interesting!”  from  time  to  time. 

“You’ll  be  very  surprised,  really,  at  what  I’m  going  to 
say,”  said  Mrs.  Burton-Cox.  “But  I have  felt,  fromj 
reading  your  books,  how  sympathetic  you  are,  howi 
much  you  understand  of  human  nature.  And  I feel  that! 
if  there  is  anyone  who  can  give  me  an  answer  to  thsl 
question  I want  to  ask,  you  will  be  the  one  to  do  so.” 

“I  don’t  think,  really . . .”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  trying  to 
tihink  of  suitable  words  to  say  that  she  felt  very  unce^ 
tain  of  being  able  to  rise  to  the  height.s  demanded  of  her.! 

Mrs.  Burton-Cox  dipped  a lump  of  .sugar  in  her  cofJ 
fee  and  cranched  it  in  a rather  carnivorou.s  way,  as 
though  it  was  a bone.  Ivory  teeth,  perhaps,  thought  Mrs, 
Oliver  vaguely.  Ivory?  Dogs  had  ivory,  walruses  had 
ivory  and  elephants  had  ivoiy,  of  course.  Great  bij 
tusks  of  ivoiy.  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  was  saying: 

“Now  the  first  thing  I must  ask  you— I’m  pretty  suR 
that  I am  right,  though--you  have  a poddaughferj 
haven’t  you?  A daughter  who’s  called  Celia  Ravens- 
croft?” 


20 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Oh,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  rather  pleasurably  sur- 
prised. She  felt  she  could  deal  perhaps  vwth  a god- 
daughter. She  had  a good  many  goddaughters — and 
godsons,  for  that  matter.  There  were  times,  she  had  to 
admit  as  the  years  were  growing  upon  her,  when  she 
couldn’t  remember  them  all.  She  had  done  her  duty  in 
due  course,  one’s  duty  being  to  send  toys  to  your  god- 
children at  Christmas  in  their  early  years,  to  visit  them 
and  their  parents,  or  to  have  them  visit  you  during  the 
course  of  their  upbringing,  to  take  the  boys  out  front 
school  perhaps,  and  the  girls  also.  And  titen,  when  tlic 
crowning  days  came,  either  the  twenty-hrst  birthday  at 
wliich  a godmother  must  do  the  right  thing  and  let  it  be 
acknowledged  to  be  done,  and  do  it  handsomely,  or  else 
marriage,  which  entailed  the  same  type  of  gift  and  a 
financial  or  other  blessing.  After  that  godchildren  rath- 
er receded  into  the  middle  or  far  distance.  They  mar- 
ried or  went  abroad  to  foreign  countries,  foreign  em- 
bassies, or  tauglit  in  foreign  schcmls  or  took  up  social 
projects.  Anyway,  they  faded  little  by  little  out  of  your 
fife.  You  wore  pleased  to  see  them  if  they  suddenly,  as  it 
were,  floated  up  on  the  horizon  again.  But  you  had  to 
remember  to  tliink  when  you  had  seen  them  last,  who.se 
daughters  they  were,  what  link  had  led  to  your  being 
chosen  as  a gotlmother. 

“Celia  Ravenscroft;”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  doing  her 
best.  “Yes,  yes,  of  course.  Yes,  definitely,” 

Not  that  any  picture  rose  before  her  eyes  of  Celia 
Ravenscroft,  not,  that  is,  since  a very  early  time.  The 
christening.  She’d  gone  to  Celia’s  christening  and  had 
found  a very  nice  Queen  Anne  silver  strainer  as  a chris- 
tening present.  Very  nice.  Do  nicely  for  straining  milk 
and  would  also  be  the  sort  of  thing  a goddaughter  could 
pilways  sell  for  a nice  little  sum  if  she  wanted  ready  mon- 
ey at  any  time.  Yes,  she  remembered  tlie  strainer  ver- 

21 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


well  indeed.  Queen  Anne — Seventeen-eleven  it  had 
been.  Britannia  mark.  How  much  easier  it  was  to  re- 
member silver  coffeepots  or  strainers  or  christening 
mugs  than  it  was  the  actual  child. 

“Yes,”  she  said,  “yes,  of  course.  I’m  afraid  I haven’t 
seen  Celia  for  a very  long  time  now.” 

“Ah,  yes.  She  is,  of  course,  a rather  impulsive  girl,” 
said  Mrs.  Burton-Cox.  “I  mean,  she’s  changed  her 
ideas  very  often.  Of  course,  very  intellectual,  did  very 
well  at  university,  but — her  political  notions — 1 sup- 
pose  all  young  people  have  political  notions  nowadays.” 

“I’m  ^raid  I don’t  deal  much  with  politics,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver,  to  whom  politics  had  always  been  anathema. 

“You  see,  I’m  going  to  confide  in  you.  I’m  going  to 
tell  you  exactly  what  it  is  I want  to  know.  I’m  sure  you' 
won’t  mind.  I’ve  heard  from  so  many  people  how  kind* 
you  are,  how  willing  always.” 

I wonder  if  she’s  going  to  try  and  borrow  money 
from  me,  thought  Mrs.  Oliver,  who  had  known  many  in- 
terviews that  began  with  this  kind  of  approach. 

“You  see,  it  is  a matter  of  the  greatest  moment  to  me. 
Something  that  I really  feel  I must  find  out.  Celia,  you 
see,  is  going  to  marry— or  thinks  she  is  going  to  many 
■ — ^my  son,  Desmond.” 

“Oh,  indeedl”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“At  least,  that  is  their  idea  at  present.  Of  course,  one 
has  to  know  about  people,  and  there’s  .something  I want 
very  much  to  know.  It’s  an  extraordinary  thing  to  ask 
anyone  and  I couldn’t  go — ^well,  I mean,  I couldn’t  very 
well  go  and  ask  a stranger,  but  I don’t  feel  you  are  a 
stranger,  dear  Mrs.  Oliver.” 

Mrs.  Oliver  thought,  I wish  you  did.  She  was  getting 
nervous  now.  She  wondered  if  Celia  had  had  an  il- 
legitimate baby  or  was  going  to  have  an  illegitimate 

22 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


baby,  and  whether  she,  Mrs.  Oliver,  was  supposed  to 
know  about  it  and  give  details.  That  would  be  very  awk- 
ward. On  the  other  hand,  thought  Mrs.  Oliver,  1 haven’t 
seen  her  now  for  five  or  six  years  and  she  nui.st  be  about 
twenty-five  or  -six,  so  it  would  be  quite  ca.sy  to  say  1 
don’t  know  anything. 

Mrs.  Burton-Cox  leaned  forward  and  breathed  hard. 

“I  want  you  to  tell  me,  because  Fm  sure  you  niu.st 
know  or  perhaps  have  a very  good  idea  how  it  all  came 
about.  Did  her  mother  kill  her  father  or  was  it  the  father 
who  killed  the  mother'^” 

Whatever  Mrs.  Oliver  had  expected,  it  wa.s  certain- 
ly not  that.  She  stared  at  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  imbeliev- 
ingly. 

“But  I don’t — ” She  stopped.  “I — I can’t  understand. 
I mean — what  reason — ” 

“Dear  Mrs.  Oliver,  you  must  know  ...  I mean,  such 
a famous  case  ...  Of  course,  1 know  it’s  a long  time 
ago  now,  well,  I suppose  ten — twenty  years  at  least,  but 
it  did  cause  a lot  of  attention  at  the  time.  I’m  sure  you’ll 
remember,  you  must  remember.” 

Mrs.  Oliver’s  brain  was  working  desperately.  Celia 
was  her  goddaughter.  That  was  quite  true.  Cclia’.s  moth- 
er— yes,  of  course,  Celia’s  mother  had  been  Molly 
Preston  Grey,  who  had  been  a friend  of  hers,  though 
not  a particularly  intimate  one,  and  of  course  she  had 
married  a man  in  the  Army,  yes — what  wa.s  hi.s  name? 
— Sir  Something  Ravenscroft.  Or  was  he  an  ambas- 
sador? Exti’aordinary,  one  couldn’t  remember  these 
things.  She  couldn’t  cvem  remember  whether  she  licrself 
had  been  Molly’s  bridesmaid.  She  thought  she  had. 
Rather  a smart  wedding  at  the  Guafds  Chapel  or  .some- 
thing like  that.  But  one  d/d  forget  so.  And  after  that 
she  hadn't  met  them  for  years — they’d  been  out  .soine- 


23 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

where— in  the  Middle  East?  In  Persia?  In  Iraq?  One 
time  in  Egypt?,  India?  Very  occasionally,  when  they 
had  been  visiting  England,  she  met  them  again.  But 
they’d  been  like  one  of  those  photographs  that  one 
takes  and  looks  at.  One  knows  the  people  vaguely  who 
axe  in  it,  but  it’s  so  faded  that  you  really  can’t  recognize 
them  or  remember  who  they  were.  And  she  couldn’t  re- 
member now  whether  Sir  Something  Ravenscroft  and 
Lady  Ravenscroft,  bom  Molly  Preston  Grey,  had  en- 
tered much  into  her  life.  She  didn’t  think  so.  But  then 
. . . Mrs.  Burton-Cox  was  still  looking  at  her.  Looking 
at  her  as  though  disappointed  in  her  lack  of  savoir- 
faire,  her  inability  to  remember  what  had  evidently 
been  a cause  cilebre. 

“Killed?  You  mean — an  accident?” 

“Oh,  no.  Not  an  accident.  In  one  of  those  houses  byi 
the  sea.  Cornwall,  I think.  Somewhere  where  there 
were  rocks.  Anyway,  they  had  a house  down  there.  And! 
they  were  both  found  on  the  cliff  there  and  they’d  been 
shot,  you  know.  But  there  was  nothing  really  that  the 
police  could  tell  whether  the  wife  shot  the  husband  and 
then  shot  herself,  or  whether  the  husband  shot  the  wife 
and  then  shot  himself.  They  went  into  the  evidence  of 
the— you  know — of  the  bullets  and  the  various  things, 
but  it  was  very  difficult.  They  thought  it  might  be  a sui- 
cide pact  and — I forget  what  the  verdict  was.  Something 
—it  could  have  been  misadventure  or  something  like 
that.  But  of  course  everyone  knew  it  must  have  been 
meant,  and  there  were  a lot  of  stories  that  went  about^ 
of  course,  at  the  time — ” 

“Probably  all  invented  ones,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  hopfrj 
fully,  trying  to  remember  even  one  of  the  stories  if  shd 
could. 

“Well,  maybe.  Maybe.  It’s  very  hard  to  say,  I know] 


24 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


There  were  tales  of  a quarrel  either  that  day  or  before, 
there  was  some  talk  of  another  man,  and  then  of  course 
there  was  the  usual  talk  about  some  other  woman. -And 
one  never  knows  which  way  it  was  about.  I think  things 
were  hushed  up  a good  deal  because  General  Ravens- 
croft’s  position  was  rather  a high  one,  and  I think  it  was 
said  that  he’d  been  in  a nursing  home  that  year,  and 
he’d  been  very  rundown  or  something,  and  that  he  real- 
ly didn’t  know  what  he  was  doing.” 

“I’m  really  afraid,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  speaking  firm- 
ly, “that  I must  say  that  I don’t  know  anything  about  it. 
I do  remember,  now  you  mention  it,  that  there  was  such 
a case,  and  1 remember  the  names  and  that  I knew  the 
people,  but  I never  knew  what  happened  or  anything  at 
all  about  it.  And  I really  don’t  think  I have  the  least 
idea ...” 

And  really,  thought  Mrs.  Oliver,  wishing  she  was 
brave  enough  to  say  it,  how  on  earth  you  have  the  im- 
pertinence to  ask  me  such  a thing,  1 don’t  know. 

“It’s  very  important  that  I should  know,”  Mrs.  Bur- 
ton-Cox said. 

Her  eyes,  which  were  rather  like  hard  marbles,  start- 
ed to  snap. 

“It’s  important,  you  see,  because  of  my  boy,  my  dear 
boy  wanting  to  marry  Celia.”  i 

“I’m  afraid  I can’t  help  you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  ‘Tve 
never  heard  anything.” 

“But  you  must  know,”  said  Mrs.  Burton-Cox.  “I 
mean,  you  write  these  wonderful  stories,  you  know  all 
about  crime.  You  know  who  commits  crimes  and  why 
they  do  it,  and  I’m  sure  that  all  sorts  of  people  will  tell 
yt)u  the  .story  behind  the  story,  as  one  so  much  thinks 
of  these  things.” 

“1  don’t  know  anything,”  said  Mrs.  OEver  in  a voice 


25 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


which  no  longer  held  very  much  politeness, , and  defi 
nitely  now  spoke  in  tones  of  distaste. 

“But  you  do  see  that  really  one  doesn’t  know  who  to 
go  to  to  ask  about  it?  I mean,  one  couldn’t  go  to  the 
police  after  all  these  years,  and  I don’t  suppose  they’d 
tell  you  anyway,  because  obviously  they  were  trying  to 
hush  it  up.  But  I feel  it’s  important  to  get  the  truth." 

- “1  only  write  books,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  coldly.  “They 
are  entirely  fictional.  I know  nothing  personally  about 
crime  and  have  no  opinions  on  criminology.  So  I’m 
afraid  I can’t  help  you  in  any  way.” 

“But  you  could  ask  your  goddaughter.  You  could 
ask  Celia.” 

“Ask  Celia!”  Mrs.  Oliver  stared  again.  “I  don’t  see 
how  I could  do  that.  She  was — why,  I think  she  must 
have  been  quite  a child  when  this  tragedy  happened.” 

“Oh,  I expect  she  knew  all  about  it,  though,”  said 
Mrs.  Burton-Cox.  “Children  always  know  everything, 
And  she’d  tell  you.  I’m  sure  she’d  tell  you." 

“You’d  better  ask  her  yourself,  I should  think,”  said 
Mrs.  Oliver. 

“I  don’t  think  I could  really  do  that,”  said  Mrs.  Bun 
ton-Cox.  I don’t  think,  you  know,  that  Desmond  would 
like  it.  You  toow  he’s  rather— well,  he’s  rather  touchy 
where  Celia  is  concerned,  and  I really  don’t  think  that 
-7-no— I’m  sure  she’d  tell  you.” 

“I  really  shouldn’t  dream  of  asking  her,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver.  She  made  a pretence  of  looking  at  her  watch. 
Oh,  dear,  she  said,  “what  a long  time  we’ve  been  over 
this  delightful  lunch.  I must  run  now.  I have  a very  im- 
portant appointment.  Good-bye,  Mrs.— er— Bedley- 
Cox,  so  sorry  I can’t  help  you,  but  these  things  arc  rather 
delicate  and— does  it  really  make  any  difference  any- 
way, from  your  point  of  view?” 


26 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“Oh,  I think  it  makes  all  the  difference.” 

At  that  moment,  a literary  figure  whom  Mrs.  Oliver 
knew  well  drifted  past.  Mrs.  Oliver  jumped  up  to  catch 
her  by  the  arm. 

“Louise,  my  dear,  how  lovely  to  see  you.  I hadn’t 
noticed  you  were  here.” 

“Oh,  Ariadne,  it’s  a long  time  since  I’ve  seen  you. 
You’ve  grown  a lot  thinner,  haven’t  you?” 

“What  nice  things  you  always  say  to  me,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver,  engaging  her  friend  by  the  arm  and  retreating 
from  the  settee.  “I’m  rushing  away  because  I’ve  got  an 
appointment.” 

“I  suppose  you  got  tied  up  with  that  awful  woman, 
didn’t  you?”  said  her  friend,  looking  over  her  shoulder 
at  Mrs.  Burton-Cox. 

“She  was  asking  me  the  most  extraordinary  ques- 
tions,” said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Oh.  Didn’t  you  know  how  to  answer  them?” 

“No.  They  weren’t  any  of  my  business  anyway.  I 
didn’t  know  anything  about  them.  Anyway,  I wouldn’t 
have  wanted  to  answer  them.” 

“Was  it  about  anything  interesting?” 

“I  suppose,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  letting  a new  idea 
come  into  her  head,  “I  suppose  it  might  be  interesting, 
only—” 

“She’s  getting  up  to  chase  you,”  said  her  friend. 
“Come  along.  I’ll  see  you  get  out  and  give  you  a lift  to 
anywhere  you  want  to  go  if  you  haven’t  got  your  car 
here.” 

“I  never  take  my  car  about  in  London,  it’s  so  awful 
to  park.” 

“I  know  it  is.  Absolutely  deadly.” 

Mrs.  Oliver  made  the  proper  good-byes.  Thanks, 
words  of  greatly  expressed  pleasure,  and  presently  was 


27 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


being  driven  round  a London  square. 

“Eaton  Terrace,  isn’t  it?”  said  the  kindly  friend. 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver;'  “but  where  I’ve  got  to  go 
now  is— I think  it’s  Whitefriars  Mansions.  I can’t  quite 
remember  the  name  of  it,  but  I know  where  it  is.” 

“Oh,  flats.  Rather  modem  ones.  Very  square  and 
geometrical.”  , 

“That’s  right,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 


28 


2. 

FIRST  MENTION  OF  ELEPIIANI^ 


Having  failed  to  find  her  friend  Hcrcnle  Poirot  at 
home,  Mrs.  Oliver  had  to  resort  to  a teiephonc  in- 
quiry. 

“Are  you  by  any  chance  going  to  be  at  home  this 
evening?”  asked  Mrs.  Oliver. 

She  sat  by  her  teiephonc,  her  fingers  tapping  rather 
nervously  on  the  tabic. 

“Would  that  be — ?” 

“Ariadne  Oliver,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  who  was  al- 
ways surprised  to  find  she  had  to  give  her  name  be- 
cause she  alway.s  expected  all  her  friends  to  know  her 
voice  as  soon  as  they  heard  it. 

“Yes,  I shall  be  at  home  all  this  evening.  Ones  that 
mean  that  1 may  have  the  pleasure  of  a visit  from  you?” 

29 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“It’s  very  nice  of  yon  to  put  it  that  way,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver.  “I  don’t  know  that  it  will  be  such  a pleasure.” 

“It  is  always  a pleasure  to  see  you,  chere  madame.” 

“I  don’t  know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  might  be  going  to 
—well,  bother  you  rather.  Ask  things.  I want  to  know 
what  you  think  about  something.” 

“That  I am  always  ready  to  tell  anyone,”  said  Poirot. 

“Something’s  come  up,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Something 
tiresome  and  I don’t  know  what  to  do  about  it.” 

“And  so  you  will  come  and  see  me.  I am  flattered. 
Highly  flattered.”  , 

“\^^at  time  would  suit  you?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Nine  o’clock?  We  will  drink  cofl'ce  together,  per- 
haps, unless  you  prefer  a grenadine  or  a Sirop  de  Cassis. 
But  no,  you  do  not  like  that.  I remember.” 

“George,”  said  Poirot  to  his  invaluable  manservant, 
“we  are  to  receive  tonight  the  pleasure  of  a visit  from 
Mrs.  Oliver.  Coffee,  I think,  and  perhaps  a liqueur  of 
some  kind.  I am  never  sure  what  she  likes.” 

*T  have  seen  her  drink  kirsch,  sir.” 

“And  also,  I think,  a creme  de  menthe.  But  kirsch,  I 
think,  is  what  she  prefers.  Very  well  then,”  said  Poirot. 
“So  be  it.” 

Mrs.  Oliver  came  punctual  to  time.  Poirot  had  been 
wondering,  while  eating  his  dinner,  what  it  was  Hud  w.-i-s 
driving  Mrs.  Oliver  to  visit  him,  and  why  .she  was  so 
doubtful  about  what  she  was  doing.  Was  she  bringing 
him  some  difficult  problem,  or  was  she  acquai tiling  him 
with  a crime?  As  Poirot  knew  well,  it  could  be  anyltiing 
With  Mrs.  Oliver.  The  most  commonplace  things  i.r  the 
most  extraordinary  things.  They  were,  as  you  might  s:ty, 
all  alike  to  her.  She  was  worried,  he  thought.  Ah,  well, 
Hercule  Poirot  thought  to  himself,  ho  could  deal  with 


30 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


Mrs.  Oliver.  He  always  had  been  able  to  deal  with  Mrs. 
Oliver.  On  occasion  she  maddened  him.  At  the  same 
time  he  was  really  very  much  attached  to  her.  They 
had  shared  many  experiences  and  experiments  together. 
He  had  read  something  about  her  in  the  paper  only  that 
morning — or  was  it  the  evening  paper?  He  must  try 
and  remember  it  before  she  came.  He  had  just  done  so 
when  she  was  announced. 

She  came  into  the  room  and  Poirot  deduced  at  once 
that  his  diagnosis  of  worry  was  true  enough.  Her  hair- 
do, which  was  fairly  elaborate,  had  been  ruffled  by  the 
fact  that  she  had  been  running  her  fingers  through  it  in 
the  frenzied  and  feverish  way  that  she  did  .sometimes. 
He  received  her  with  every  sign  of  pleasure,  established 
her  in  a chair,  poured  her  some  coffee  and  handed  her 
a glass  of  kirsch. 

“Ah!”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  with  the  sigh  of  someone  who 
has  relief.  “1  expect  you’re  going  to  tliink  I’m  awfully 
silly,  but  still . . 

“I  see,  or  rather,  I saw  in  the  paper  that  you  were 
attending  a literary  luncheon  today.  Famous  women 
writers.  Something  of  that  kind.  I thought  you  never 
did  that  kind  of  thing.” 

“I  don’t  usually,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “and  I shan’t  ever 
do  it  again.” 

“Ah.  You  suffered  much?"  Poirot  was  quite  sympa- 
thetic. 

He  knew  Mrs.  Oliver’s  embarrassing  moments.  Ex- 
travagant praise  of  her  books  always  upset  her  highly 
because,  as  she  had  once  told  him,  she  never  knew  the 
proper  answers. 

“You  did  not  enjoy  it?” 

“Up  to  a point  I did,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “and  then 
something  very  tiresome  happened.” 


31 


ELEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

“Ah.  Md  that  is  what  you  have  come  to  see  me 
about.” 

“Yes,  but  I really  don’t  know  why.  I mean,  it’s  noth- 
ing to  do  with  you  and  I don’t  think  it’s  the  sort  of  thing 
you’d  even  be  interested  in.  And  I’m  not  really  inter- 
ested in  it.  At  least,  I suppose  I must  be  or  I wouldn’t 
have  wanted  to  come  to  you  to  know  what  you  thought. 
To  know  what— well,  what  you’d  do  if  you  were  me.” 

“That  is  a very  difficult  question,  that  last  one,”  said 
Poirot.  “I  know  how  I,  Hercule  Poirot,  would  act  in 
anything,  but  I do  not  know  how  you  would  act,  well 
though  I know  you.” 

“You  must  have  some  idea  by  this  time,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver.  “You’ve  known  me  long  enough.” 

“About  what — twenty  years  now?” 

“Oh,  I don’t  know.  I can  never  remember  what  years 
are,  what  dates  are.  You  know,  I get  mixed  up.  I know 
nineteen  thirty-nine  because  that’s  when  the  war  started 
and  I know  other  dates  because  of  queer  things,  here 
and  there.” 

“Anyway,  you  went  to  your  literary  luncheon.  And 
you  did  not  enjoy  it  very  much.” 

“I  enjoyed  the  lunch  but  it  was  afterwards  ...” 

“People  said  things  to  you,”  said  Poirot,  with  the 
kindliness  of  a doctor  demanding  symptoms. 

“Well,  they  were  just  getting  ready  to  say  things  to 
me.  Suddenly  one  of  those  large,  bossy  women  who  al- 
ways manage  to  dominate  everyone  and  who  can 
make  you  feel  more  uncomfortable  than  anyone  else, 
descended  on  me.  You  know,  like  somebody  who 
catches  a butterfly  or  something,  only  she’d  have  needed 
a butterfly  net.  She  sort  of  rounded  me  up  and  pushed 
me  on  to  a settee  and  then  she  began  to  talk  to  me,  start- 
ing about  a goddaughter  of  mine.^* 


32 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Ah,  yes.  A goddaughter  you  are  fond  of?” 

“I  haven’t  seen  her  for  a good  many  years,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver.  “I  can’t  keep  up  with  all  of  them,  I mean.  And 
then  she  asked  me  a most  woriying  question.  She  want- 
ed me — oh,  dear,  how  very  difficult  it  is  for  me  to  tell 
this—” 

“No,  it  isn’t,”  said  Poirot  kindly,  “It  is  quite  easy. 
Everyone  tells  everything  to  me  sooner  or  later.  I’m 
only  a foreigner,  you  see,  so  it  does  not  matter.  It  is  ea.sy 
because  I am  a foreigner.” 

“Well,  it  is  rather  easy  to  say  things  to  you,”  said 
Mrs.  Oliver.  “You  see,  she  asked  me  about  the  girl’s 
father  and  mother.  She  asked  me  whether  her  mother 
had  killed  her  father  or  her  father  had  killed  her 
mother.” 

“1  beg  your  pardon,”  said  Poirot. 

“Oh,  I know  it  sounds  mad.  Well,  I thought  it  was 
imad.” 

“Wliether  your  goddaughter’s  mother  had  killed  her 
father,  or  whether  her  father  had  killed  her  mother.” 

“That’s  right,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“But — was  that  a matter  of  fact?  Had  her  father 
killed  her  mother  or  her  mother  killed  her  father?” 

“Well,  they  were  bcuh  found  shot,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 
“On  the  top  of  a cliff.  I can’t  remember  if  it  was  ia 
Cornwall  or  in  Corsica.  Something  like  that.” 

“It  was  true,  then,  what  she  said?” 

“Oh,  yes,  that  part  of  it  was  true.  It  happened  yeais 
ago.  Well,  but  I mean — ^why  come  to  me?”  ‘ 

, “All  because  you  were  a crime  writer,”  said  Poirot. 
“She  no  doubt  said  you  knew  all  about  crime.  This 
was  a real  thing  that  happened?" 

“Oh,  yes.  It  wa.sn'(  .something  like  what  would  A do 
*-or  what  would  be  the  proper  procedure  if  your  moth- 

33 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

er  had  killed  your  father  or  your  father  had  killJ 
your  mother.  No,  it  was  something  that  really  haJ 
pened.  I suppose  really  I’d  better  tell  you  all  about  it| 
I mean,  I can’t  remember  all  about  it,  but  it  was  quite , 
well  known  at  the  time.  It  was  about— oh,  I shoulj 
think  it  was  about  twenty  years  ago  at  least.  And,  a; 
I say,  I can  remember  the  names  of  the  people  bt ! 
cause  I did  know  them.  The  wife  had  been  at  school 
with  me  and  I’d  known  her  quite  well.  We’d  bee, 
friends.  It  was  a well-known  casev — you  know,  it  wai 
in  all  the  papers  and  things  like  that.  Sir  Alist^ 
Ravenscroft  and  Lady  Ravenscroft.  A very  happj 
couple  and  he  was  a colonel  or  a general  and  she’ij 
been  with  him  and  they’d  been  all  over  the  world 
Then  they  bought  this  house  somewhere  I think  \ 
was  abroad  but  I can’t  remember.  And  then  theij 
were  suddenly  accounts  of  this  case  in  the  papen, 
Whether  somebody  else  had  killed  them  or  whethei 
they’d  been  assassinated  or  something,  or  whethei 
they  kiUed  each  other.  I think  it  was  a revolver  tha| 
had  been  in  the  house  for  ages  and— well,  I’d  bettei 
tell  you  as  much  as  I can  remember.” 

Pulling  herself  slightly  together,  Mrs.  Oliver  mat- 
aged  to  give  Poirot  a more  or  less  clear  r6sum6  ol 
what  she  had  been  told.  Poirot  from  time  to  tim 
checked  on  a point  here  or  there. 

“But  why,”  he  said  finally,  “why  should  this  womai 
want  to  know  this?”  _ i 

“Well,  that’s  what  I want  to  find  out,”  said  Mp 
Oliver.  “I  could  get  hold  of  Celia,  I think.  I mean,  sb 
still  lives  in  London.  Or  perhaps  it’s  Cambridge  sin 
lives  in,  or  Oxford.  I think  she’s  got  a degree  and  eit| 
er  lectures  here  or  teaches  somewhere,  or  docs  som^ 
thing  like  that.  And— very  modern,  you  know.  Go® 

34 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


^out  with  long-haired  people  in  queer  clothes.  I don’t 
think  she  takes  drugs.  She’s  quite  all  right  and — ^^just 
Very  occasionally  I hear  from  her.  I mean,  she  sends  * 
V card  at  Christmas  and  things  like  that.  Well,  one 
doesn’t  think  of  one’s  godchildren  all  the  time,  and 
We’s  quite  twenty-five  or  -six.” 

“Not  married?” 

“No.  Apparently  she  is  going  to  marry — or  that  is 
*the  idea — Mrs.— -what’s  the  name  of  that  woman 
■again? — oh,  yes,  Mrs.  Brittle — no — Burton-Cox’s  son.” 

“And  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  does  not  want  her  son  to 
jnarry  this  girl  because'  her  father  killed  her  mother 
br  her  mother  killed  her  father?” 

“Well,  1 suppose  so,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “It’s  the 
only  thing  I can  think.  But  what  does  it  matter  which? 
tf  one  of  your  parents  killed  the  other,  would  it  really 
patter  to  the  mother  of  the  boy  you  were  going  to  mar- 
fcy  which  way  round  it  was?” 

I “That  is  a tiling  one  might  have  to  think  about,” 
laid  Poirot.  “It  i.s — yes,  you  know  it  is  quite  interest- 
ing. 1 do  not  mean  it  Is  very  interesting  about  Sir 
Alistair  Ravenscrofl  or  Lady  Ravenscroft.  I seem  to 
temember  vjiguely — oh,  .some  arse  like  this  one,  or  it 
pight  not  have  been  the  same  one.  But  it  is  very 
Strange  about  Mrs.  Burton-Cox.  Perhaps  she  is  a bit 
touched  in  the  head.  I.s  she  very  fond  of  her  son?” 

“Probably,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Probably  she  doesn’t 
want  him  to  marry  this  girl  at  all.” 

“Because  she  may  liave  inherited  a predisposition 
to  murder  the  man  she  marries — or  something  of  that 
kind?” 

“How  do  1 know?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “She  seems  to 
toiak  that  I can  fell  her,  and  she's  really  not  told  me 
inough,  has  she?  But  why,  do  you  think?  What’s  bc- 


35 


EUPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

hind  it  all?  What  does  it  mean?”  ^ 

“It  would  be  almost  interesting  to  find  out,”  said 
Poirot. 

“Well,  that’s  why  I’ve  come  to  you,”  said  Mrs.  OH- 
ver.  “You  like  finding  out  things.  Things  that  you  can’t 
see  the  reason  for  at  first.  I mean,  that  nobody  can  sej 
the  reason  for.”  ^ 

“Do  you  think  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  has  any  prefer- 
ence?” said  Poirot. 

“You  mean  that  she’d  rather  the  husband  killed  thi 
wife,  or  the  wife  killed  the  husband?  I don’t  think  so.” 

“WeU,”  said  Poirot,  “I  see  your  dilemma.  It  is  veij 
intriguing.  You  come  home  from  a party.  You’ve  beei 
asked  to  do  something  that  is  very  difficult,  almost  in 
possible,  and— you  wonder  what  is  the  proper  way  t 
deal  with  such  a thing.” 

“Well,  what  would  you  think  is  the  proper  way? 
said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“It  is  not  easy  for  me  to  say,”  said  Poirot.  “I’m  no 
a woman.  A woman  whom  you  do  not  really  kno« 
whom  you  had  met  at  a party,  has  put  this  problem  t 
you,  asked  you  to  do  it,  giving  no  discernible  reason.”  j 

“Right,”  smd  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Now  what  does  Ail 
adne  do?  What  does  A do,  in  other  words,  if  you  wei 
reading  this  as  a problem  in  a newspaper?”  | 

“Well,  I suppose,”  said'  Poirot,  “there  are  thnj 
things  that  A could  do.  A could  write  a note  to  Mn 
Burton-Cox  and  say,  Tm  very  sorry,  but  I really  fe< 
I cannot  oblige  you  in  this  matter,’  or  whatever  wonj 
you  like  to  put.  B.  You  get  in  touch  vrith  your  gc^ 
daughter  and  you  tell  her  what  has  been  asked  of  yo 
by  the  mother  of  the  boy,  or  the  young  man,  or  whal 
ever  he  is,  whom  she  is  thinking  of  marrying.  You  wi 
find  out  from  her  if  she  is  really  thinking  of  marryii| 


36 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

this  young  man.  It’  so,  whether  she  has  any  idea  or 
whether  the  young  man  has  said  anything  to  her  about 
iwhat  his  mother  has  got  in  her  head.  And  there  will 
be  other  interesting  points,  like  finding  out  what  this 
girl  thinks  of  the  mother  of  the  young  man  she  wants 
marry.  The  third  thing  you  could  do,”  said  Poirot, 

I, ‘‘and  this  really  is  what  I firmly  advise  you  to  do, 

is . . 

“I  know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “one  word.” 

“Nothing,”  said  Poirot. 

“Exactly,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  know  that  is  the  ‘ 
limple  and  proper  thing  to  do.  Nothing.  It’s  darned 
ieheek  to  go  and  tell  a girl  who’s  my  goddaughter  what 
|ier  future  mother-in-law  is  going  about  saying  and 
Isking  people.  But — ” 

“I  know,”  said  Poirot,  “it  is  human  curiosity.” 

“I  want  to  know  why  that  odious  woman  came  and 
paid  what  she  did  to  me,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Once  1 
|new  that  1 could  relax  and  forget  all  about  it.  But 
pntil  1 know  that . . .” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “you  won’t  sleep.  You’ll  wake  up 
la  the  night  and,  if  I know  you,  you  will  have  the 
^ost  extraordinary  and  extravagant  ideas  which  pres- 
ently, probably,  you  will  be  able  to  make  into  a most 
attractive  crime  story.  A whodunit — a thriller.  All  sorts 

bf  things.”  . , ,s 

“Well,  I suppose  I could  if  I thought  of  it  that  way, 
said  Mrs.  Oliver.  Her  eyes  flashed  slightly. 

“Leave  it  alone,”  said  Poirot.  “It  will  be  a very  dif- 
ficult plot  to  undertake.  It  seems  as  though  there  could 

jje  no  good  reason  for  this.”  _ 

“But  I’d  like  to  make  sure  that  there  is  no  good  rea- 
son.” . 

“Human  curiosity,”  said  Poirot.  “Such  a very  mter- 


37 


elephants  can  remember 

■esung  thtag.”  He  sighed.  “To  think  what  We  owe  t. 
tooighout  histow.  Curiosity.  I don’t  know  who 
ed  curiosity.  It  is  said  to  be  usually  assoctattd  wtfh  L 
cat  Curiosity  killed  the  cat  But  I should  say  r* 

that  the  Greeks  were  the  inventors  of  curiosity.  The 

wanted  to  know.  Before  them,  as  far  as  I can  see  ni 
body  wanted  to  know  much.  They  ]ust  wanted  | 
know  what  the  rules  of  the  country  they  were  hv, 
in  were,  and  how  they  could  avoid  having  their  heal 
cut  off  or  being  impaled  on  spikes  or  something  d 
agreeable  happening  to  them.  But  they  either  obeyl 
or  disobeyed.  They  didn’t  want  to  know  why.  But  m 
then  a lot  of  people  have  wanted  to  know  why  and  a 
foS  of  thinp  hL  happened  because  of  that.  Boi 
trains  flying  machines  and  atom  bombs  and  pemo 
Un  and  cures  for  various  iUnesses.  A little  boy  watc* 
his  mother’s  kettle  raising  its  lid  because  of  | 
steam.  And  the  next  thing  we  know  is  we  have  railw 
trains,  leading  on  in  due  course  to  railway  strikes  ai 

all  that.  And  so  on  and  so  on.” 

‘‘Just  tell  me,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “do  you  think  fi 

a terrible  nosey-parker?”  , , t j 

“No  I don’t,”  said  Poirot.  “On  the  whole  I doi 
think  you  are  a woman  of  great  curiosity.  But  I a 
quite  see  you  getting  in  a het-up  state  at  a literary  pi 
ty  busy  defending  yourself  against  too  much  Mndne 
too  much  praise.  You  ran  yourself  instead  into  a ve 
awkward  dilemma,  and  took  ^ a very  strong  disUke 
'the  person  who  ran  you  into  it.” 

“Yes.  She’s  a very  tiresome  woman,  a very  disagB 

able  woman.”  . , , j j 

“This  murder  in  the  past  of  this  husband  and 
who  were  supposed  to  get  on  well  together  and  no 
parent  sign  of  a quarrel  was  known.  One  never  n 
read  about  any  cause  for  it,  according  to  you?’ 

38 


ELEPHAKTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“They  were  shot.  Yes,  they  were  shot.  It  could  have 
been  a suicide  pact.  I think  the  police  thought  it  was 
at  first.  Of  course,  one  can’t  find  out  about  things  all 
those  years  afterwards.” 

“Oh,  yes,”  said  Poirot,  “I  think  I could  find  out 
something  about  it.” 

“You  mean — through  the  exciting  friends  you’ve 
got?” 

“Well,  I wouldn’t  say  the  exciting  friends,  perhaps. 
Certainly  there  are  knowledgeable  friends,  friends  who 
could  get  certain  records,  look  up  the  accounts  that 
were  given  of  the  crime  at  the  time,  some  access  I 
could  get  to  certain  records.” 

“You  could  find  out  things,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  hope- 
fully, “and  then  tell  me.” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “1  think  I could  help  you  to  know 
at  any  rate  the  full  facts  of  the  case.  It’ll  take  a little 
time,  though.” 

“I  can  see  that  if  you  do  that,  which  is  what  I want 
you  to  do,  I’ve  got  to  do  something  myself.  I’ll  have  to 
see  the  girl.  I’ve  got  to  see  whether  she  knows  any- 
thing about  all  this,  ask  her  if  she’d  like  me  to  give  her 
mother-in-law-to-be  a raspberry,  or  whether  there  is 
any  other  way  in  which  I can  help  her.  And  I’d  like  to 
see  the  boy  she’s  going  to  marry,  too.” 

“Quite  right,”  said  Poirot.  “Excellent.” 

“And  I suppose,”  said  Mrs,  Oliver,  “there  might  be 
people — ” She  broke  off,  frowning. 

“1  don’t  suppose  people  will  be  very  much  good,” 
said  Hercule  Poirot.  “'Phis  is  an  affair  of  the  past.  A 
cause  ctUihre,  perhaps  at  the  time.i  But  what  is  a cause 
cil&bre  when  you  come  to  think  of  it?  Unless  it  comes 
to  an  astoni.shing  denouement,  which  this  one  didn’t. 
Nobody  i emembers  it.” 

“No,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “ttiat  is  quite  true.  There 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

was  a lot  about  it  in  the  papers  and  mentions  of  it  for 
some  time,  and  then  it  just — ^faded  out.  Well,  li]{{ 
things  do  now.  Like  that  girl,  the  other  day.  You  know, 
who  left  her  home  and  they  couldn’t  find  her  any. 
where.  Well,  I mean,  that  was  five  or  six  years  ago 
and  then  suddenly  a little  boy,  playing  about  in  a sand 
heap  or  a gravel  pit  or  something,  suddenly  came 
across  her  dead  body.  Five  or  six  years  later.” 

“That  is  true,”  said  Poirot.  “And  it  is  true  that  know- 
ing from  the  body  how  long  it  is  since  death  and  wha! 
happened  on  the  particular  day  and  going  back  over 
various  events  of  which  there  is  a written  record,  one 
may  in  the  end  turn  up  a murderer.  But  it  will  be  mote 
difiicult  in  your  problem  since  it  seems  the  answei 
must  be  one  of  two  things:  that  the  husband  disliked 
his  wife  and  wanted  to  get  rid  of  her,  or  that  the  wifi 
hated  her  husband  or  else  had  a lover.  Therefore,  it 
might  have  been  a passionate  crime  or  something  quite 
different.  Anyway,  there  would  be  nothing,  as  it 
were,  to  find  out  about  it.  If  the  police  could  not 
find  out  at  the  time,  then  the  motive  must  have  been  a 
difiicult  one,  not  easy  to  see.  Therefore  it  has  remained 
a nine  days’  wonder,  that  is  all.” 

“I  suppose  I can  go  to  the  daughter.  Perhaps  that  is 
what  that  odious  woman  was  getting  me  to  do — wanted 
me  to  do.  She  thought  the  daughter  knew — well,  th( 
daughter  might  have  known,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Chil- 
dren do,  you  know.  They  know  the  most  extraordi- 
nary things.” 

“Have  you  any  idea  how  old  this  goddaughter  ol 
yours  would  have  been  at  the  time?” 

“Well,  I have  if  I reckon  it  up,  but  I can’t  saj 
offhand.  I think  she  might  have  been  nine  or  ten,  « 
perhaps  older,  I don’t  know.  I think  that  she  was  awa| 


40 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

at  school  at  the  time.  But  that  may  be  just  my  fancy, 
remembering  back  what  I read.” 

“But  you  think  Mrs.  Burton-Cox’s  wish  was  to 
make  you  get  information  from  the  daughter?  Perhaps 
the  daughter  knows  something,  perhaps  she  said  some- 
thing to  the  son,  and  the  son  said  something  to  his 
mother.  I expect  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  tried  to  question 
the  girl  herself  and  got  rebuffed,  but  thought  the 
famous  Mrs.  Oliver,  being  both  a godmother  and  also 
full  of  criminal  knowledge,  might  obtain  informa- 
tion. Though  why  it  should  matter  to  her,  I stiff  don’t 
see,”  said  Poirot.  “And  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that 
what  you  call  vaguely  ‘people’  can  help  after  all  this 
time.”  He  added,  “Would  anybody  remember?” 

“Well,  that’s  where  I think  they  might,”  said  Mra. 
Oliver. 

“You  surprise  me,”  said  Poirot,  looking  at  her  with 
a somewhat  puzzled  face.  “Do  people  remember?” 

“Well,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  was  really  thinking  of 
elephants.” 

“Elephants?” 

As  he  had  thought  often  before,  Poirot  thought  that 
really  Mrs.  Oliver  was  the  most  unaccountable  woman. 
Why  suddenly  elephants? 

“I  was  thinking  of  elephants  at  the  lunch  yester- 
day,” said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Why  were  you  thinking  of  elephants?”  said  Poirot 
vfrith  some  curiosity. 

“Well,  r was  really  thinking  of  teeth.  You  know, 
things  one  tries  to  eat,  and  if  you’ve  got  some  sort  of 
false  teeth — well,  you  can’t  do  it  very  well.  You  know, 
you’ve  got  to  know  what  you  can  eat  and  what  you 
can’t” 

“Ahl”  said  Poirot  with  a deep  sigh.  “Yes,  yes. 


At 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

The  dentists,  they  can  do  much  for  you,  but  not  every.! 
thing.” 

“Quite  so.  And  then  I thought  of — ^you  know — o®; 
teeth  being  only  bone  and  so  not  awfully  good,  and 
how  nice  it  would  be  to  be  a dog,  who  has  really  ivory 
teeth.  And  then  I thought  of  anyone  else  who  has  ivory 
teeth,  and  I thought  about  walruses  and— oh,  othei 
thitigt  like  that.  And  I thought  about  elephants.  01 
when  you  think  of  ivory,  you  do  think  of  ele 
phants,  don’t  you?  Great  big  elephant  tusks.” 

“That  is  very  true,”  said  Poirot,  still  not  seeing  tli( 
point  of  what  Mrs.  Oliver  was  saying. 

“So  I thought  that  what  we’ve  really  got  to  do  is  to 
get  at  the  pepple  who  are  like  elephants,  Becaust 
elephants,  so  they  say,  don’t  forget.” 

“I  have  heard  the  phrase,  yes,”  said  Poirot. 

“Elephants  don’t  forget,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “You 
know,  a story  children  get  brought  up  on?  How  somfr 
one,  an  Indian  tailor,  stuck  a needle  or  something  | 
an  elephant’s  tusk.  No.  Not  a tusk,  his  trunk,  of  course, 
an  elephant’s  trunk.  And  the  next  time  the  elephant 
came  past  he  had  a great  mouthful  of  water  and  he 
splashed  it  out  all  over  the  tailor,  though  he  hadn’t 
seen  him  for  several  years.  He  hadn’t  forgotten.  He 
remembered.  That’s  the  point,  you  see.  Elephanh 
remember.  What  I’ve  got  to  do  is — I’ve  got  to  get  u 
touch  with  some  elephants.” 

“I  do  not  know  yet  if  I quite  see  what  you  mean,' 
said  Hercule  Poirot.  “Who  are  you  cla.ssifying  as  eh 
phants?  You  sound  as  though  you  were  going  for  inlor 
mation  to  the  zoo.” 

“Well,  it’s  not  exactly  like  that,”  said  Mrs.  Olivet; 
“Not^  elephants,  as  elephants,  but  the  way  people  up  to 
a point  would  resemble  elephants.  There  are  some  pw 


42 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


pie  who  do  remember.  In  fact,  one  does  remember 
queer  things.  I mean,  there  are  a lot  of  things  that  I 
remember  very  weU.  They  happened — I remember  a 
birthday  party  I had  when  I was  five,  and  a pink 
cake — a lovely  pink  cake.  It  had  a sugar  bird  on  it. 
And  I remember  the  day  my  canary  flew  away  and  I 
cried.  And  I remember  another  day  when  I went  into 
a field  and  there  was  a bull  there  and  somebody  said  it 
would  gore  me,  and  I was  terrified  and  wanted  to  run 
out  of  the  field.  Well,  I remember  that  quite  well.  It  was 
a Tuesday,  too.  I don’t  know  why  I should  remember  it 
was  a Tuesday,  but  it  was  a Tuesday.  And  I remember 
a wonderful  picnic  with  blackberries.  I remember 
getting  pricked  terribly,  but  getting  more  blackberries 
than  anyone  else.  It  was  wonderfull  By  that  time  I 
was  nine,  I think.  But  one  needn’t  go  back  as  far  as 
that.  I mean,  I’ve  been  to  hundreds  of  weddings  in  my 
life,  but  when  I look  back  on  a wedding  there  are  only 
two  that  I remember  particularly.  One  where  I was  a 
bridesmaid.  It  took  place  in  the  New  Forest,  I remem- 
ber, and  I can’t  remember  who  was  there  actually.  I 
think  it  was  a cousin  of  mine  getting  married.  I didn’t 
know  her  very  well,  but  she  wanted  a good  many 
bridesmaids  and,  well,  I came  in  handy,  I suppose.  But 
I know  another  wedding.  That  was  a friend  of  mine  in 
the  Navy.  He  was  nearly  drowned  in  a submarine,  and 
then  he  was  saved  again,  and  then  the  girl  he  was  en- 
gaged to,  her  people  didn’t  want  her  to  marry  him,  but 
then  he  did  marry  her  after  that  and  I was  one  of  her 
bridesmaids  at  the  marriage.  Well,  I mean,  there’s  al- 
ways things  you  do  remember,” 

“I  sec  your  point,”  said  Poirot.  “I  find  it  interest- 
ing. So  you  will  go  d la  recherche  des  iliphants?” 

“That’s  rigltL  I’d  have  to  g^t  the  date  right” 


43 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“There,”  said  Poirot,  “1  hope  I may  be  able  to  help 
you.” 


“And  then  I’ll  think  of  people  I knew  aliout  at  that 
time,  people  that  I may  have  known  who  also  knew 
the  same  friends  that  I did,  who  probably  knew  Gen- 
eral What-not.  People  who  may  have  known  them 
abroad,  but  whom  I also  knew  although  I mayn’t  have 
seen  them  for  a good  many  yeans.  You  can  look  up 
people,  you  knqw,  that  you  haven’t  .seen  tor  a long 
time.  Because  people  are  always  quite  plca.scd  to  see 
someone  coming  up  out  of  the  past,  even  if  they  can’t 
remember  very  much  about  you.  And  then  you  natural- 
ly will  talk  about  the  things  that  were  happening  at  tliat 
date,  that  you  remember  about.” 

“Very  interesting,”  said  Poirot.  “I  think  you  are  very 
well  equipped  for  what  you  propo.se  to  tio.  People 
who  knew  the  Ravenscrofts  either  well  or  not  very 
well;  people  who  lived  in  the  same  part  of  the  world 
where  the  thing  happened  or  who  might  have,  been  stay- 
ing there.  More  difficult,  but  1 think  one  could  get  at  it 
And  so,  somehow  or  other  one  would  try  dilfercnt 
things.  Start  a little  talk  going  about  what  happened, 
what  they  think  happened,  what  anyone  else  has 
wer  told  you  about  what  might  have  happened.  About 
ly  love  affairs  the  husband  or  wife  had,  about  any 
oney  that  somebody  might  have  inherited.  I think  you 
.ould  scratch  up  a lot  of  things.” 

“Oh,  dear,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “Fm  afraid  retilly  I’m 
just  a nosey-parker/* 


“You’ve  been  given  an  assipment,”  said  Poirot, 
^ not  by  someone  you  like,  not  by  someone  wish 
to  obhge,  but  someone  you  entirely  dislike.  That  docs 
not  matter.  You  are  still  on'a  quest— -a  quest  of  knowl- 
edge. You  take  your  own  path.  It  is  the  path  of  the  cle- 


44 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

phants.  The  elephants  niay  remember.  Bon  voyage," 
said  Poirot, 

“I  beg  your  pardon,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Fm  sending  you  forth  on  your  voyage  of  discovery,” 
said  Poirot.  “A  la  recherche  des  Elephants." 

“I  expect  Fm  mad,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  sadly.  She 
brushed  her  hands  through  her  hair  again  so  that 
she  looked  like  the  old  picture  books  of  Struwelpeter. 
“I  was  just  thinking  of  starting  a story  about  a golden 
retriever.  But  it  wasn’t  going  well.  I couldn’t  get  start- 
ed, if  you  know  what  I mean.” 

“All  right,  abandon  the  golden  retriever.  Concern 
yourself  only  with  elephants.” 


45 


3. 

GRFAT-AUNT  ALICE’S 
GUIDE  TO  KNOWLEDGE 


“Can  you  find  my  address  book  for  me,  Miss  Living- 
stone?” 

“It’s  on  your  desk,  Mrs.  Oliver,  In  the  left-hand  cor- 
ner.” 

“I  don’t  mean  that  one,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “That’s  the 
one  I’m  using  now.  I mean  my  last  one.  The  one  I 
had  last  year,  t>r  perhaps  the  one  before  that  again.” 

“Has  it  been  thrown  away,  perhaps?”  suggested  Miss 
Livingstone. 

“No,  I don’t  throw  away  address  books  and  things 
like  that  becau.se  so  often  you  want  one.  I mean  some 
address  that  you  haven’t  copied  into  the  new  one.  I ex- 
pect it  may  be  in  one  of  the  drawers  of  the  tallboys,” 

Miss  Livingstone  was  a fairly  new  arrival,  replacing 

49 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Miss  Sedgvnck.  Ariadne  OUver  missed  Miss  Sedgwick, 
Sedgwick  knew  so  many  things.  She  knew  the  placei 
where  Mrs.  Oliver  sometimes  put  things,  the  kind  o! 
places  Mrs.  OUver  kept  things  in.  She  remembered  % 
names  of  people  Mrs.  OUver  had  written  nice  lettets 
to,  and  the  names  of  people  that  Mrs.  OUver,  goaded 
beyond  endurance,  had  written  rather  rude  things  to. 
She  was  invaluable,  or  rather,  had  been  invaluable, 
**She  was  Uke — what  was  the  book  called?  M!ts*  Oli* 
ver  said,  casting  her  mind  back.  “Oh,  yes,  I know— a 
big  brown  book.  All  Victorians  had  it.  Enquire  Within 
upon  Everything.  And  you  could,  too!  How  to  take  iroj 
mark  stains  off  linen,  how  to  deal  with  curdled  mayon- 
naise, how  to  start  a chatty  letter  to  a bishop.  Many, 
many  things.  It  was  all  there  in  Enquire  Within  upon 
Everything.”  Great-aunt  AUce’s  great  stand-by. 

Miss  Sedgwick  had  been  just  as  good  as  Aunt  Alice’s 
book.  Miss  Livingstone  was  not  at  all  the  same  thing, 
Miss  Livingstone  stood  there  always,  very  long-faced, 
with  a saUow  skin,  looking  purposefully  efficient.  Ev- 
ery Une  of  her  face  said,  “I  am  very  efficient.”  But 
she  wasn’t  reaUy,  Mrs.  OUver  thought.  She  only  knevf 
aU  the  places  where  former  literary  employers  of  hen 
had  kept  things  and  where  she  clearly  considered  Mrs. 
OUver  ought  to  keep  them. 

“What  I want,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  with  firmness  and 
the  determination  of  a spoiled  child,  “is  my  nineteen 
seventy  address  book.  And  I think  nineteen  sixty-nine 
as  weU.  Please  look  for  it  as  quick  as  you  can,  will  you?” 

“Of  course,  of  course,”  said  Miss  Livingstone. 

She  looked  around  her  with  the  rather  vacant  expres- 
sion of  someone  who  is  looking  for  something  she  has 
never  heard  of  before  but  which  eflicicncy  may  be  abk 
to  produce  by  some  unexpected  turn  of  luck. 

E l don’t  get  Sedgwick  back,  I shall  go  mad,  thought 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


Mrs.,  Oliver  to  herself.  I can’t  deal  with  this  thing  if  I 
don’t  have  Sedgwick. 

Miss  Livingstone  started  pulling  open  various  draw- 
ers in  the  furniture  in  Mrs.  Oliver’s  so-called  study 
and  writing  room. 

“Here  is  last  year’s,”  said  Miss  Livingstone  happily. 
“That  will  be  much  more  up-to-date,  won’t  it?  Nineteen 
seventy-one.” 

“I  don’t  want  nineteen  seventy-one,”  said  Mrs.  Oli- 
ver. 

Vague  thoughts  and  memories  came  to  her. 

“Look  in  that  tea  caddy  table,”  she  said. 

Miss  Livingstone  looked  round,  looking  worried. 

“That  table,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  pointing. 

“A  desk  book  wouldn’t  be  likely  to  be  in  a tea  cad- 
dy,” said  Miss  Livingstone,  pointing  out  to  her  employ- 
er the  general  facts  of  life. 

“Yes,  it  could,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  seem  to  remem- 
ber.” 

Edging  Miss  Livingstone  aside,  she  went  to  the  tea 
caddy  table,  raised  the  lid,  looked  at  the  attractive  in- 
laid work  inside.  “And  it  is  here,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  rais- 
ing the  lid  of  a papier-machd  round  canister,  devised 
to  contain  Lapsang  Souchong  as  opposed  to  Indian  tea, 
and  taking  out  a curled-up,  small  brown  notebook. 

“Here  it  is,”  she  said. 

“That’s  only  nineteen  sixty-eight,  Mrs.  Oliver.  Four 
years  ago.” 

“That’s  about  right,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  seizing  it  and 
taking  it  back  to  the  desk.  “That’s  all  for  the  present. 
Miss  Livingstone,  but  you  might  see  if  you  can  find  my 
birthday  book  somewhere.” 

“I  didn’t  know ...” 

“L  don’t  use  it  now,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “but  I used  to 
have  one  jonce^  Quite  a big  one,  Started 

51 


ELEPHAMTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

when  I was  a child.  Goes  on  for  years.  I expect  it’ll  be 
in  the  attic  upstairs.  You  know,  the  one  we  use  as  a 
spare  room  sometimes  when  it’s  only  boys  coming  foi 
holidays,  or  people  who  don’t  mind.  Ihc  soi  t of  chest 
or  bureau  thing  next  to  the  bed. 

“Oh.  Shall  I look  and  see?” 

“That’s  the  idea,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

She  cheered  up  a little  as  Miss  Livingstone  went  out 
of  the  room.  Mrs.  Oliver  shut  the  do(»r  iinniy  behind 
her,  went  back  to  the  desk  and  started  looking  down 
the  addresses  written  in  faded  ink  and  smelling  of  tea. 

“Ravenscroft.  Celia  Ravenscroft.  Yes.  Ftmrteen 
Fishacre  Mews,  S.W.  Three.  That’s  the  Chelsea  ad- 
dress. She  was  living  there  then.  But  there  was  another 
one  after  that.  Somewhere  like  Strand-on-ttiC-Green 
near  Kew  Bridge.” 

She  turned  a few  more  pages. 

“Oh,  yes,  this  seems  to  be  a later  one.  Mardylfe 
Grove.  That’s  off  Fulham  Road,  I think.  Somewhere 
like  that.  Has  she  got  a telephone  number?  It’s  veiy 
rubbed  out,  but  I think — yes,  I think  thtit’s  right — Flax- 
man . . . Anyway,  I’ll  try  it.” 

She  went  across  to  the  telephone.  The  door  opened 
and  Miss  Livingstone  looked  in. 

“Do  you  think  that  perhaps — ” 

“I  found  the  address  I want,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “Go 
on  looking  for  that  birthday  book.  It’s  jmpt>rlant.” 

“Do  you  thunk  you  could  have  left  it  when  yon 
were  in  Sealy  House?” 

“No,  I don’t,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Go  on  looking.” 

She  murmured,  as  die  door  closed,  “Be  as  long  as 
you  like  about  it.” 

She  dialed  the  telephone  and  waited,  opening  the 
door  to  call  up  the  stairs:  “You  might  try  that  Spanitii 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


chest.  You  know,  the  one  that’s  bound  with  brass. 
I’ve  forgotten  where  it  is  now.  Under  the  table  in  the 
hall,  I think.” 

Mrs.  Oliver’s  first  dialing  was  not  successful.  She  ap- 
peared to  have  connected  herself  to  a Mrs.  Smith  Pot- 
ter, who  seemed  both  annoyed  and  unhelpful  and  had 
no  idea  what  the  present  telephone  number  might  be 
of  anyone  who  had  lived  in  that  particular  flat  before. 

Mrs.  Oliver  applied  herself  to  an  examination  of  the 
address  book  once  more.  She  discovered  two  more  ad- 
dresses which  were  hastily  scrawled  over  other  num- 
bers and  did  not  seem  wildly  helpful.  However,  at 
the  third  attempt  a somewhat  illegible  Ravenscroft 
seemed  to  emerge  from  the  crossings-out  and  initials 
and  addres.ses. 

A voice  admitted  to  knowing  Celia. 

“Oh,  dear,  yes.  But  she  hasn’t  lived  here  for  years. 
I think  she  was  in  Newcastle  when  I last  heard  from 
her.” 

“Oh,  dear,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “Fm^  afraid  I haven’t 
got  that  address.” 

“No,  1 haven’t  got  it  either,”  said  the  kindly  girl.  “I 
think  she  went  to  be  secretary  to  a veterinary  surgeon.” 

It  did  not  sound  very  hopeful.  Mrs.  Oliver  tried  once 
or  twice  more.  I’he  addresses  in  the  latest  of  her  two  ad- 
dress books  were  no  use,  so  she  went  back  a bit 
further.  She  struck  oil,  as  you  might  put  it,  when  she 
came  to  the  last  one,  which  was  for  the  year  1962. 

“Oh,  you  mean  Celia,”  said  a voice.  “Celia  Ravens- 
croft, wasn’t  it?  Or  was  it  Finchwell?” 

Mrs.  Oliver  just  prevented  herself  in  time  from  say- 
ing, “No,  and  it  wasn’t  redbreast  either.” 

“A  very  competent  girl,”  said  the  voice.  “She  worked 
for  me  for  over  a year  and  a half.  Oh,  yes,  very  compe- 


53 


' ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

tent.  I would  have  been  quite  happy  if  she  had  stayei 
longer.  I tbinlr  she  went  from  here  to  somewhere! 
Harley  Street,  but  I think  I’ve  got  her  address  some- 
where.  Now  let  me  see.”  There  was  a long  pause  whl 
Mrs.  X— name  unknown— was  seeing.  “I’ve  got  oat 
address  here.  It  seems  to  be  in  Islington  somewhere, 

Do  you  think  that’s  possible?” 

Mrs.  Oliver  said  that  anything  was  possible  aal 
thanked  Mrs.  X very  much  and  wrote  it  down. 

“So  difficult,  isn’t  it,  trying  to  find  people’s  addressei, 
They  do  send  them  to  you  usually.  You  know,  a sortol 
postcard  or  something  of  that  kind.  Personally  I alwaji 
seem  to  lose  it” 

Mrs.  Oliver  said  that  she  herself  also  suffered  in  tlii 
respect.  She  tried  the  Islington  number.  A heavy,  for. 
eign  voice  replied  to  her. 

“You  want,  yes — you  tell  me  what?  Yes,  who  fe 
here?” 

“Miss  Celia  Ravenscroft?” 

“Oh,  yes,  that  is  very  true.  Yes,  yes,  she  lives  hea 
She  has  a room  on  the  second  floor.  She  is  out  non 
and  she  not  come  home.” 

“Will  she  be  in  later  this  evening?” 

“Oh,  she  be  home  very  soon  now,  I think,  becaus 
she  come  home  to  dress  for  party  and  go  out” 

Mrs.  Oliver  thanked  her  for  the  information  and  rani 
off. 

“Really,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  to  herself  with  some  an- 
noyance, “girls!” 

She  tried  to  think  how  long  It  was  since  she  haJ 
last  seen  her  goddaughter,  Celia.  One  lost  touch.  Thai 
was  the  whole  point  Celia,  she  thought,  was  in  Londoi 
now.  If  her  boy  friend  was  in  London,  or  if  the  raoliet 
of  her  boy  friend  was  in  London — aU  of  it  went  togethM. 


54 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Oh,  dear,  thought  Mrs.  Oliver,  this  really  makes  my 
head  ache.  “Yes,  Miss  Livingstone?”  She  turned  her 
head. 

Miss  Livingstone,  looking  rather  unlike  herself  and 
decorated  with  a good  many  cobwebs  and  a general 
coating  of  dust,  stood  looking  annoyed  in  the  doorway 
holding  a pile  of  dusty  volumes. 

“I  don’t  know  whether  any  of  these  things  will  be 
any  use  to  you,  Mrs.  Oliver.  They  seem  to  go  back  for  a 
great  many  years.”  She  was  disapproving. 

“Bound  to,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“I  don’t  know  if  there’s  anything  particular  you  want 
me  to  search  for." 

“I  don’t  think  so,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “if  you’ll  just 
put  them  on  the  corner  of  the  sofa  there  I can  look  at 
them  this  evening.” 

Miss  Livingstone,  looking  more  disapproving  every 
moment,  said,  “Very  good,  Mrs.  Oliver.  I think  I wiU 
just  dust  them  first.” 

“That  will  be  very  kind  of  you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  just 
stopping  herself  in  time  from  saying — “and  for  good- 
ness’ sake,  dust  yourself  as  well.  You’ve  got  six  cobwebs 
in  your  left  ear.” 

She  glanced  at  her  watch  and  rang  the  Islington 
number  again.  The  voice  that  answered  this  time  was 
purely  Anglo-Saxon  and  had  a crisp  sharpness  about  it 
that  Mrs.  Oliver  felt  was  rather  satisfactory. 

“Miss  Ravenscroft? — Celia  Ravenscroft?” 

“Yes,  this  is  Celia  Ravenscroft.” 

“Well,  I don’t  expect  you’ll  remember  me  very  well. 
I’m  Mrs.  Oliver.  Ariadne  Oliver.  We  haven’t  seen  each 
other  for  a long  titne,  but  actually  I’m  your  godmother.” 

“Oh,  yes,  of  course.  I know  that.  No,  we  haven’t 
seen  each  other  for  a long  time.” 

55' 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“I  wonder  very  much  if  I could  see  you,  if  you  could 
come  and  see  me,  or  whatever  you  like.  Would  you 
like  to  come  to  a meal  or  . . 

“Well,  it’s  rather  difficult  at  present,  where  I’m  wort 
ing.  I could  come  round  this  evening,  if  you  like.  About 
haU-past  seven  or  eight.  I’ve  got  a date  later  but ...” 

“If  you  do  that,  I shall  be  very,  very  pleased,” 
said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Well,  of  course  I will.” 

“I’ll  give  you  the  address.”  Mrs.  Oliver  gave  it. 

“Good.  I’ll  be  there.  Yes,  I know  where  that  is 
quite  well.” 

Mrs.  Oliver  made  a brief  note  on  the  telephone 
pad  and  looked  with  some  annoyance  at  Miss  Living- 
stone, who  had  just  come  into  the  room  struggling  un- 
der the  weight  of  a large  album. 

“I  wonder  if  this  could  possibly  be  it,  Mrs.  Oliver?” 

“No,  it  couldn’t,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “That’s  got  cook- 
ery recipes  in  it.” 

“Oh,  dear,”  said  Miss  Livingstone,  “so  it  has.” 

“Well,  I might  as  well  look  at  some  of  them  anyway," 
said  Mrs.  Oliver,  removing  the  volume  firmly.  “Go  and 
have  another  look.  You  know,  I’ve  thought  about  the 
lineh  cupboard.  Next  door  to  the  bathroom.  You’d  have : 
to  look  on  the  top  shelf  above  the  bath  towels.  I do 
sometimes  stick  papers  and  books  in  there.  Wait  a min- 
ute. I’ll  come  up  and  look  myself.” 

Ten  minutes  later  Mrs.  Oliver  was  looking  through 
the  pages  of  a faded  album.  Miss  Livingstone,  having 
entered  her  final  stage  of  martyrdom,  was  standing  by 
the  door.  Unable  to  bear  the  sight  of  so  much  suffering, 
Mrs.  Oliver  said: 

“Well,  that’s  all  right  You  might  just  take  a look 
in  the  desk  ip  the  dining  room.  The  old  desk,  ^ou  know, 
the  one  that’s  broken  a bit  See  if  you  can  find  some 


56 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

more  address  books.  Early  ones.  Anything  up  to  about 
ten  years  old  will  be  worth  while  having  a look  at.  And 
after  that,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “I  don’t  think  I shall  want 
anything  more  today.” 

Miss  Livingstone  departed. 

“I  wonder,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  to  herself,  releasing  a 
deep  sigh  as  she  sat  down.  She  looked  through  the  pages 
of  the  birthday  book,  “Who’s  better  pleased?  She  to  go 
or  I to  see  her  go?  After  Celia  has  come  and  gone,  I 
shall  have  to  have  a busy  evening.” 

Taking  a new  exercise  book  from  the  pile  she  kept 
on  a small  table  by  her  desk,  she  entered  various  dates, 
possible  addresses  and  names,  looked  up  one  or  two 
more  things  in  the  telephone  book  and  then  proceeded, 
to  ring  up  Monsieur  Ilercule  Poirot. 

“Ah,  is  tliat  you.  Monsieur  Poirot?” 

“Yes,  niadamc,  it  is  I myself.” 

“Have  you  done  anything?"  said  Mrs.  OUwr. 

“I  beg  your  pardon — have  I done  what?” 

“Anything,”  .said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “What  I asked  you 
about  yesterday.” 

“Yes,  certainly.  I have  put  things  in  motion.  I have 
arranged  to  make  certain  inquiries,” 

“But  you  haven’t  made  them  yet,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver, 
who  had  a poor  view  of  what  the  male  view  was  of  do- 
ing something. 

“And  you,  chUre  madame?" 

“1  have  been  very  busy,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Ah!  And  what  have  you  been  doing,  madame?” 

“Assembling  elephants,”  smd  Mrs.  Oliver,  “if  that 
means  anytiiiug  to  you." 

“1  think  1 can  understand  what  you  mean,  yes,” 

“It’s  not  very  easy,  looking  into  the  past,"  smd  Mrs. 
Oliver.  “It  is  astonishing,  really,  how  many  people  one 
does  remember  when  one  comes  to  look  up  names.  My 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

word,  the  silly  things  they  write  in  birthday  books  some- 
times, too.  I can’t  think  why  when  I was  about  sixteen 
or  seventeen  or  even  thirty,  I wanted  people  to  write  in 
my  birthday  book.  There’s  a sort  of  quotation  from  a 
poet  for  every  particular  day  in  the  year.  Some  of  them 
are  terribly  silly.” 

“You  are  encouraged  in  your  search?” 

“Not  quite  encouraged,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “But  I still 
think  I’m  on  the  right  lines.  I’ve  rung  up  ray  goddaugh- 
ter—” 

“Ah.  And  you  are  going  to  see  her?” 

“Yes,  she  is  coming  to  see  me.  Toniglit  between  seven 
and  eight,  if  she  doesn’t  run  out  on  me.  One  never 
knows.  Young  people  are  very  unreliable.”  , 

“She  appeared  pleased  that  you  had  rung  her  up?” 

“I  don’t  know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “not  particularly 
pleased.  She’s  got  a very  incisive  voice  and — I remem- 
ber now,  the  last  time  I saw  her,  that  mu.st  be  about 
ten  years  ago,  I thought  then  that  she  was  rather 
frightenmg.” 

“Frightening?  In  what  way?” 

“What  I mean  is  that  she  was  more  likely  to  bully 
me  than  I would  be  to  buUy  her.”  . 

“That  may  be  a good  thing  and  not  a bad  thing,” 

“Oh,  do  you  tliink  so?” 

“If  people  have  made  up  their  mind.s  that  they  do 
not  wish  to  like  you,*that  they  are  quite  sure  they  do 
not  like  you,  they  win  get  more  pleasure  out  of  making 
you  aware  of  the  fact  and  in  that  way  will  release  more 
information  to  you  than  they  would  have  done  if  they 
were  trying  to  be  amiable  and  agreeable.” 

“Sucking  up  to  me,  you  mean?  Ye.s,  you  have  som^ 
thing  there.  You  mean  then  they  tell  you  things  that 
they  thought  would  please  you.  And  the  other  way 
they’d  be  annoyed  with  you  and  they’d  say  dungs  that 


58 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

they’d  hope  would  annoy  you.  I wonder  if  Celia’s  like 
that?  I really  remember  her  much  better  when  she 
was  five  years  old  than  at  any  other  age.  She  had  a 
nursery  governess  and  she  used  to  throw  her  boots  at 
her.” 

"The  governess  at  the  child,  or  the  child  at  the  gov- 
erness?” 

“The  child  at  the  governess,  of  course!”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver. 

She  replaced  the  receiver  and  went  over  to  the  sofa 
to  examine  the  various  piled-up  memories  of  the  past. 
Shc  murmured  names'  under  her  breath. 

“Mariana  Josephine  Pontarlier — of  course,  yes,  I 
haven’t  thought  of  her  for  years — I thought  she  was 
dead.  Anna  Braceby-  -yes,  yes,  she  lived  in  that  part 
of  the  world-—!  wonder  now — ” 

Continuing  all  this,  time  passed — she  was  quite  sur- 
prised when  the  bell  rang.  She  went  out  herself  to  open 
the  door. 


4. 

CELIA 


A tall  girl  was  standing  on  the  mat  outside.  Just  for  a 
moment  Mrs.  Oliver  was  startled,  looking  al  her.  So  this 
was  Celia.  The  impression  of  vitality  and  of  life  was 
really  very  strong.  Mrs.  Oliver  had  the  feeling  which 
one  does  not  often  get.  . 

Here,  she  thought,  was  someone  who  meant  stune- 
thing.  Aggressive,  perhaps,  could  be  dillieiilt,  could  he 
almost  dangerous  perhaps.  One  of  those  girls  who  had 
a mission  in  life,  who  was  dedicated  to  vitilcncc,  per- 
haps, who  went  in  for  causes.'But  interesting.  Delinitc- 
ly  interesting. 

“Come  in,  Celia,”  she  said.  “It’s  such  a long  tiine 
since  I saw  you.  The  last  time,  as  far  a-s  I rcmenihcr. 
was  at  a wedding.  You  were  a bridesmaid.  Yoti  wiuc 
apricot  chiffon,  I remerhber,  and'  large  bunches  of-  - -1 

60 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

can’t  remember  what  it  was,  something  that  looked  like 
goldenrod.” 

“Probably  was  goldenrod,”  said  Celia  Ravenscroft. 
“We  sneezed  a lot — with  hay  fever.  It  was  a terrible 
wedding.  I know.  Martha  Leghorn,  wasn’t  it?  Ugliest 
bridesmaids’  dresses  I’ve  ever  seen.  Certainly  the  ugliest 
I’ve  ever  worn!” 

“Yes.  They  weren’t  very  becoming  to  anybody. 
You  looked  better  than  most,  if  I may  say  so.” 

“Well,  it’s  nice  of  you  to  say  that,”  said  Celia.  “I 
didn’t  feci  my  best.” 

Mrs.  Oliver  indicated  a chair  and  manipulated  a 
couple  of  decanters. 

“Like  sherry  or  something  else?” 

“No.  I’d  like  sherry.” 

“There  you  are,  then.  I suppose  it  seems  rather  odd 
to  you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “My  ringing  you  up  suddenly 
like  this.” 

“Oh,  no,  I don’t  know  that  it  does  particularly.” 

“Fm  not  a very  conscientious  godmother,  I’m  afraid.” 

“Why  should  you  be,  at  my  age?” 

“You’re  right  there,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “One’s  duties, 
one  feels,  end  at  a certain  time.  Not  that  I ever  really 
fulfilled  mine.  I don’t  remember  coming  to  your  con- 
firmation.” 

“I  believe  the  duty  of  a godmother  is  to  make  you 
learn  your  catechism  and  a few  things  like  that,  isn’t  it? 
Renounce  the  devil  and  all  bis  works  in  my  name,”  said 
Celia.  A faint,  humorous  smile  came  to  her  lips. 

She  was  being  very  amiable  but  all  the  same,  thou^t 
Mrs,  Oliver,  she’s  rather  a dangerous  girl  in  some  ways. 

“Well,  ri!  tcU  you  why  Fve  been  trying  to  get  hold  of 
you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “The  whole  thing  is  rather  pe- 
culiar. 1 don’t  often  go  out  to  literary  parties,  but  as  it 

61 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

happened  I did  go  out  to  one  the  day  before  yester- 
day.” 

“Yes,  I know,”  said  Celia.  “I  saw  mention  of  it  in 
the  paper,  and  you  had  your  name  in  it,  too,  Mrs. 
Ariadne  Oliver  and  I rather  wondered  bccairse  1 know 
you  don’t  usually  go  to  those  sort  of  things.” 

“No,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  rather  wish  1 hadn’t  gone 
to  that  one.” 

“Didn’t  you  enjoy  it?” 

“Yes,  I did  in  a way  because  I hadn’t  been  to  one 
before.  And  so— well,  the  first  time  llicre’s  always 
something  that  amuses  you.  But,”  she  addeci,  “tlicre’s 
usually  something  that  annoy.s  you  a.s  welt.” 

“And  something  happened  to  annoy  you?” 

“Yes.  And  it’s  connected  in  an  odd  sort  of  way  with 
you.  And  I thought — ^well,  I thought  I ought  to  fell  you 
about  it  because  I didn’t  like  what  luippcncd.  i didn’t 
like  it  at  all.” 

“Sounds  intriguing,”  said  Celia,  and  sipped  her 
sherry. 

“There  was  a woman  there  who  carnc  and  .sjx>ke  to 
me.  I didn’t  know  her  and  she  didn’t  know  me.” 

“Still,  I suppose  that  often  happens  to  you,”  said 
Celia. 

“Yes,  invariably,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  ‘Tt’.>i  one  of  the 
—hazards  of  literary  life.  People  come  up  to  you  and 
say,  T do  love  your  books  so  much  and  I’m  so*plea.scd 
to  be  able  to  meet  you.’  That  sort  of  thing." 

“I  was  secretary  to  a writer  once.  I do  know  about 
that  sort  of  thing  and  how  difficult  it  is." 

“Yes,  well,  there  was  some  of  that  Uw,  !>ut  that  I 
was  prepared  for.  And  tlien  this  wotuitn  ctuiic  up  to 
me  and  she  said,  ‘I  believe  you  have  a godduugliter 
called  Celia  Ravenscroft’  ” 

“Well,  that  was  a bit  odd,”  said  Celia.  “Just  coming 


62 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


up  to  you  and  saying  that.  It  seems  to  me  she  ought  to 
have  led  into  it  more  gradually.  You  know,  talking 
about  your  books  first  and  how  much  she’d  enjoyed 
the  last  one,  or  something  like  that.  And  then  sliding  in- 
to me.  What  had  she  got  against  me?” 

“As  far  as  I know  she  hadn’t  got  anything  against 
you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Was  she  a friend  of  mine?” 

“I  don’t  know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

There  was  a silence.  Celia  sipped  some  more  sherry 
and  looked  very  scarchingiy  at  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“You  know,”  she  said,  “you’re  rather  intriguing  me. 
I can’t  see  quite  what  you’re  leading  into.” 

“Well,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “I  hope  you  won’t  be  angry 
with  me.” 

“Why  should  I be  angry  with  you?” 

“Well,  because  I’m  going  to  tell  you  something,  or 
repeat  something,  and  you  might  say  it’s  no  business  of 
mine  or  I ought  to  keep  quiet  about  it  and  not  mention 
it.” 

“You’ve  aroused  my  curiosity,”  said  Celia. 

“Her  name  she  mentioned  to  me.  She  was  a Mrs. 
Burton-Cox.” 

“Oh!”  Celia’s  “Oh”  was  rather  distinctive,  “Oh,” 

“You  know  her?” 

“Yes,  I know  her,”  said  Celia. 

“Well,  I thought  you  must,  because—” 

“Because  of  what?” 

“Because  of  something  she  said.” 

“What — about  me?  That  she  knew  me?” 

“She  said  that  she  thought  her  son  might  be  going  to 
marry  you.” 

Celia’s  expression  changed.  Her  eyebrows  went  up, 
came  down  again.  She  looked  very  hard  at  Mrs,  Oliver. 

“You  want  to  know  if  that’s  so  or  not?” 


63 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“No,”  said  Mrs.  OUver,  “I  don’t  particularly  want  to 
know  I merely  mention  that  because  it  s one  of  the 
first  things  she  said  to  me.  She  said  because  you  were 
my  goddaughter,  I might  be  able  to  ask  you  to  give  me 
some  information.  I presume  that  she  meant  that  if 
the  infonhation  was  given  to  me  I was  to  pass  it  on  to 

er.” 

“Whatinformatioh?” 

“Well,  I don’t  suppose  you’ll  like  what  T’m  going  to 
,ay  now,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  didn’t  like  it  myself.  In 
fact,  it  gives  me  a very  nasty  feeling  ail  dtwn  my  spine 
because  I think  it  was— well,  such  awful  cheek.  Aw- 
ful bad  manners.  Absolutely  unpardonable.  She  .said, 
‘Can  you  find  out  if  her  father  murdered  her  motficr  or 
if  her  mother  murdered  her  father?’  ” 

“She  said  that  to  you?  Asked  you  to  do  thatV’ 

“Yes.” 

“And  she  didn’t  know  you?  I mean,  apart  from  being 
an  authoress  and  being  at  the  party?” 

“She  didn’t  know  me  at  all.  She’d  never  met  me,  I’d 
never  met  her.” 

“Dldn’t  you  find  that  extraordinary?” 

“I  don’t  know  that  I’d  find  anything  extraordinary 
that  that  woman  said.  She  .struck  me,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver, 
“if  I may  say  so,  as  a particularly  odious  woman.” 

“Oh,  yes.  She  is  a particularly  odious  womam” 

“And  are  you  going  to  marry  her  son?” 

“Well,  we’ve  considered  the  question.  I don’t  know. 
You  knew  what  she  was  talking  about?” 

“Well,  I know  what  I suppose  anyone  would  know 
who  was  acquainted  with  your  family.” 

“That  my  father  and  mother,  after  he  had  retired 
from  India,  bought  a house  In  the  country,  that  they 
went  out  one  day  for  a walk  together,  u walk  along 
the  cliff  path.  That  they  were  found  tliere,  both  of  them 

64 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

shot.  There  was  a revolver  lying  there.  It  belonged  to 
my  father.  He  had  had  two  revolvers  in  the  house,  it 
seems.  There  was  nothing  to  say  whether  it  was  a sui- 
cide pact  or  whether  my  father  killed  my  mother  and 
flien  shot  himself,  or  my  mother  shot  my  father  and  then 
^killed  herself.  But  perhaps  you  know  all  this  already.” 

" “I  know  it  after  a fashion,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “It  hap- 
pened I think  about  twelve — fifteen  years  ago.” 

“About  that,  yes.” 

“And  you  were  about  twelve  or  fourteen  at  the  time.” 

“Yes . . 

. “I  don’t  know  much  about  it,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I 
wasn’t  even  in  England  myself.  At  the  iSme — I was  on  a 
lecture  tour  in  America.  I simply  read  it  in  the  paper. 
It  was  given  a lot  of  space  in  the  press  because  it  was 
difficult  to  know  the  real  facts — there  did  not  seem  to 
be  any  motive.  Your  father  and  mother  had  always 
been  happy  together  and  lived  on  good  tenns.  I remem- 
ber that  being  mentioned.  1 was  interested  because  I 
had  known  your  father  and  mother  when  we  were  all 
much  younger,  especially  your  mother.  I was  at  school 
with  her.  After  that  our  ways  led  apart.  I married  and 
went  somewhere  and  she  married  and  went  out,  as  far 
as  I remember,  to  India  or  some  place  like  that,  with 
her  soldier  husband.  But  she  did  ask  me  to  be  god- 
mother to  one  of  her  children.  You.  Since  your  mother 
and  father  were  living  abroad,  I saw  very  little  of  them 
for  many  years.  I saw  you  occasionally.” 

“Yes.  You  used  to  take  me  out  from  school.  I re- 
member that.  Gave  me  some  specially  good  feeds,  too. 
Lovely  food  you  gave  me.” 

“You  were  an  unusual  child.  You  liked  caviar." 

“I  still  do,”  said  Celia,  “though  I don’t  get  it  offered 
to  me  very  often.” 

• “1  was  shocked  to  read  this  mention  of  things  in  the 


ELEPHAHTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

paper.  Very  little  was  said.  I gathered  it  was  a land  o{ 
open  verdict.  No  particular  motive.  Nothing  to  show. 
No  accounts  of  quarrel,  there  was  no  suggestion  of 
there  having  been  an  attack  from  outside.  I was 
shocked  by  it,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “and  then  I forgot  it. 
I wondered  once  or  twice  what  could  have  led  to  it, 
but  as  I was  not  in  the  country — I was  doing  a tour  at 
the  time,  in  America  as  I’ve  said — the  whole  thing 
passed  out  of  my  mind.  It  was  some  years  later  when! 
next  saw  you  and  naturally  I did  not  speak  of  it  to  you.” 
“No,”  said  Celia,  “I  appreciate  that.” 

“All  through  life,”  Mrs.  Oliver  said,  “one  comes 
across  very  curious  things  that  happen  to  friends  or  to 
acquaintances.  With  friends,  of  course,  very  often  you 
have  some  idea  of  what  led  to — whatever  the  incident 
might  be.  But  if  it’s  a long  time  since  you’ve  heard  them 
diseussed  or  talked  to  them,  you  are  quite  in  the  dark 
and  there  is  nobody  that  you  can  show  too  much 
curiosity  to  about  the  occasion.” 

“You  were  always  very  nice  to  me,”  said  Celia.  “You 
sent  me  nice  presents,  a particularly  nice  present  when 
I was  twenty-one,  I remember.” 

“That’s  the  time  when  girls  need  some  extra  cash  in 
nd,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “because  there  are  so  many 
ings  they  want  to  do  and  have  just  then.” 

“Yes,  I always  thought  you  were  an  understanding 
person  and  not— well,  you  know  what  some  people  are 
like.  Always  questioning,  and  asking  things  and  want- 
ing to  know  all  about  you.  You  never  asked  questions. 
You  used  to  take  me  out  to  shows,  or  give  me  nice 
meals,  and  talk  to  me  as  though,  well,  as  though  every- 
thing was  aU  right  and  you  were  just  a distant  relation 
of  the  family.  I’ve  appreciated  that.  I’ve  known  so  many 
nosey-parkers  in  my  life.” 

“Yes.  Everyone  comes  up  against  that  sooner  or 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

later,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “But  you  see  now  what  upset 
me  at  this  particular  party.  It  seems  an  extraordinary 
thing  to  be  asked  to  do  by  a complete  stranger  like  Mrs. 
Burton-Cox.  I couldn’t  imagine  why  she  should  want 
to  know.  It  was  no  business  of  hers,  surely.  Unless — ” 

“You  thought  it  was,  unless  it  was  something  to  do 
; with  my  marrying  Desmond.  Desmond  is  her  son.” 

“Yes,  I suppose  it  could  have  been,  but  I couldn’t 
see  how,  or  what  business  it  was  of  hers.” 

“Everything’s  her  business.  She’s  nosey — in  fact  she’s 
what  you  said  she  was,  an  odious  woman.” 

“But  I gather  Desmond  isn’t  odious.” 

“No.  No,  I’m  very  fond  of  Desmond  and  Desmond 
iis  fond  of  me.  I don’t  like  his  mother.” 

“Does  he  like  his  mother?” 

“I  don’t  really  know,”  said  Celia.  “I  suppose  he  might 
like  her — anything’s  possible,  isn’t  it?  Anyway,  I don’t 
want, to  get  married  at  present.  I donk  feel  like  it.  And 
there  are  a lot  of — oh,  well,  difHcultiies,  you  know  there 
are  a lot  of  fors  and  againsts.  It  must  have  made  you 
feel  rather  curious,”  said  Celia.  “I  mean,  wh;^  Mrs. 
Nosey  Cox  should  have  asked  you  to  try  and  worm 
things  out  of  me  and  then  run  along  and  spUl  it  all  to 
her — Are  you  asking  me  that  particular  question,  by 
the  way?” 

“You  mean,  am  I asking  you  whether  you  think  or 
know  that  your  mother  killed  your  father  or  your  father 
killed  your  mother,  or  whether  it  was  a double  sui- 
dde?  Is  that  what  you  mean?” 

“Well,  I suppose  it  is,  in  a way.  But  I think  I have 
to  ask  you  also,  if  you  were  wanting  to  ask  me  that, 
whether  you  were  doing  so  with  the  idea  of  ^ving  Mrs. 
|Burton-Cox  the  information  you  obtained,  in  case  you 
did  receive  any  information  from  me.” 

“No,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Quite  decidedly  no.  I 


67 


ELEPHANTS  GAN  flEiEM8Ei 

shouldn’t  dream  of  telUng  the  odious  woman  anything 
of  the  sort  I shaU  teU  her  quite  firmly  that  it  is  not  any 
business  of  hers  or  of  mine,  and  that  I have  no  inten- 
tion  of  obtaining  information  from  you  and  retafimgit 

“Well  that’s  what  I thought,”  said  Celia.  I thought 
I could  trust  you  to  that  extent.  I don’t  mind  telling  yon 
what  I do  know.  Such  as  it  is.” 

“You  needif t.  I’m  not  asking  you  for  it. 

“No.  I can  quite  see  that.  But  I’ll  give  you  the  answer 
aE  the  same.  The  answer  is— nothing.” 

“Nothing,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  thoughtfully. 

“No.  I wasn’t  there  at  the  time.  I mean,  I wasn’t  in 
the  house  at  the  time.  I can’t  remember  now  quite 
where  I was.  I think  I was  at  school  in  Switzerland,  or 
else  I was  staying  with  a school  friend  during  tlie  school 
hofidays.  You  see,  it’s  all  rather  mixed  up  in  my  mind  by 

now.”  . „ „ ..  j 

“I  suppose,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  doubtfully,  “it  wouldn’t 

be  likely  that  you  would  know.  Considering  your  age  ^ 

the  time.”  , . , i 

‘Td  be  interested,”  said  Celia,  “to  know  just  whal 
you  feel  about  that.  Do  you  think  it  would  be  likely  foi 
me  to  know  all  about  it?  Or  not  to  know?” 

“Well,  you  said  you  weren’t  in  the  house.  If  you’ii 
been  in  the  house  at  the  time  then,  yes,  1 think  it  would 
be  quite  likely  that  you  might  know  something.  Chi 
dren  do.  Teenagers  do.  People  of  that  age  know  a lot 
they  see  a lot,  they  don’t  talk  about  it  very  often.  Bid 
they  do  know  things  that  the  out-siiic  world  wtiuldnl 
know,  and  they  do  know  thinp  that  they  wouldn’t  b( 
willing,  shall  we  say,  to  tell  to  police  Inquirers.”  , 

“No.  You’re  being  quite  sensible.  I wouldn’t’vj 
known.  I don’t  think  I did  know,  1 don’t  think  1 had  an] 
idea.  What  efid  the  police  think?  You  don’t  mind  my  8^ 

68 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

ingyou  that,  I hope,  because  I should  be  interested.  You 
see,  I never  read  any  account  of  thS  inquest  or  anything 
like  that  or  the  inquiry  into  it.” 

“I  think  they  thought  it  was  a double  suicide,  but  I 
don’t  think  they  ever  had  any  inkling  as  to  the  reason 
for  it.” 

“Do  you  want  to  know  what  I think?” 

“Not  if  you  don’t  want  me  to  know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“But  I expect  you  arc  interested.  After  all,  you  write 
crime  stories  about  people  who  kill  themselves  or  kill  ‘ 
each  other,  or  who  have  rca.sons  for  things.  I should  * 
think  you  would  be  interested.” 

“Yes,  I’ll  admit  that,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “But  the  last 
Biing  I want  to  do  i.s  to  offend  you  by  seeking  for  in- 
^mation  which  is  no  bu.sinc.ss  of  mine  to  know.” 

“Well,  I wondered,”  said  Celia.  “I’ve  often  wondered 
S:om  time  to  time  why,  and  how,  but  I knew  very  little 
ibout  things.  I mean,  about  how  things  were  going  on 
It  home.  The  holidays  before  that  I had  been  away  on 
KKchange  on  the  continent,  so  1 hadn’t  seen  my  mother 
md  father  really  very  recently.  I mean,  they’d  come  out 
0 Switzerland  and  taken  me  out  from  school  once  or 
wice,  but  that  was  all.  They  seemed  much  as  usual,  but 
hey  seemed  older.  My  fatfier,  I think,  was  ailing.  I 
nean,  getting  feebler.  I don’t  know  if  it  was  heart  or 
irhat  it  was.  One  dewsn’t  really  think  about  that.  My 
lother,  too,  she  wa.s  going  rather  nervy.  Not  hypo- 
hondriac,  but  a little  inclined  to  fuss  over  her  health, 
’hey  were  on  good  terms,  quite  friendly.  There  wasn’t 
(lything  tliat  I noticed.  Only  sometimes  one  would, 
»ell,  sometimes  one  gets  ideas.  One  doesn’t  think 
ley’re  true  or  necessarily  right  at  aM,  but  one  just  won- 
BTS  if—” 

“I  don’t  think  we’d  better  talk  about  It  any  more,” 
lid  Mrs.  Oliver.  “We  don’t  need  to  know  or  find  out. 

69 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


The  whole  thing’s  ovet  and  done  with.  The  verdict  ^ 
quite  satisfactory.  No  ineans  to  show,  or  motive,  oi 
- anything  like  that.  But  there  was  no  question  of  you 
faflier  having  deliberately  killed  your  mother  or  of  you 
mother  having  deliberately  killed  your  father.” 

“If  I thought  which  was  most  likely,”  said  Celia,  “l 
would  think  my  father  killed  my  mo'thcr.  Because,  you 
see,  it’s  more  natural  for  a man  to  shoot  anyone,  I thinl, 
40  Tp  shoot  a woman  for  whatever  reason  it  was.  I don't 
think  a woman,  or  a woman  like  my  mother,  would  be 
so  likely  to  shoot  my  father.  If  she  wanted  him  dead,! 
should  think  she  might  have  chosen  some  other  method 
But  I don’t  think  either  of  them  wanted  the  other  one 
dead.” 

“So  it  could  have  been  an  outsider.” 

“Yes,  but  what  does  one  mean  by  an  outsider?" 
smd  Celia. 

“Who  else  was  there  living  in  the  house?” 

“A  housekeeper,  elderly,  rather  blind  and  ratha 
deaf,  a foreign  girl,  an  au  pair  girl,  she’d  been  my  gov- 
emess  once^— she  was  awfully  nice — she  came  back  to 
look  after  my  mother,  who  had  been  in  ho.spitaI — And 
there  was  an  aunt  whom  I never  loved  much.  I don’t 
think  any  of  them  could  have  been  likely  to  have  any 
grudge  against  my  parents.  There  wsis  nobody  who 
profited  by  their  deaths,  except,  I suppo.se,  my.sdf  and 
my  brother  Edward,  who  wa.s  four  years  younger  thm 
I was.  We  inherited  what  money  there  was,  but  i 
wasn’t  very  much.  My  father  had  his  pension,  of  course, 
My  mother  had  a small  income  of  her  own.  No.  Then 
was  nothing  there  of  any  importance.” 

“I’m  sorry,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I’m  sorry  if  I’ve  dis- 
tressed you  by  asking  all  this.” 

“You  haven’t  distressed  me.  You’ve  brought  it  up  in 
my  mind  a little  and  it  has  interested  me.  Because,  yon 

70 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

see,  I am  of  an  age  now  that  I wish  I did  know.  I knew 
and  was  fond  of  them,  as  one  is  fond  of  parents.  Not 
passionately,  just  normally,  but  I realize  I don’t  know 
what  they  were  really  like.  What  their  life  was  like. 
What  mattered  to  them.  I don’t  know  anything  about  it 
all.  I wish  I did  know.  It’s  like  a burr,  something  sticking 
into  you,  and  you  can’t  leave  it  alone.  Yes.  I would  like 
to  know.  Because  then,  you  see,  I shouldn’t  have  to 
think  about  it  any  more.” 

“So  you  do?  Think  about  it?” 

Celia  looked  at  her  for  a moment.  She  seemed  to  be 
trying  to  come  to  a decision. 

“Yes,”  she  said,  “I  think  about  it  nearly  all  the  time. 
I’m  getting  to  have  a thing  about  it,  if  you  know  what  I 
mean.  And  Desmond  feels  the  same.” 


71 


5. 

OLD  SINS  HAVE  LONG  SHADOWS 


Hercule  Poirot  let  the  revolving  door  wind  him  round 
Arresting  the  swing  of  it  with  one  hand,  he  stepped  for- 
ward into  the  small  restaurant.  There  were  not  many 
people  there.  It  was  an  unfashionable  time  of  day,  but 
his  eyes  soon  saw  the  man  ho  had  come  to  meet.  The 
square,  solid  bulk  of  Superintendent  Spence  ro.se  from 
the  table  in  one  comer. 

“Good,”  he  said.  “You  have  arrived  here.  You  had 
no  dijBBcuIty  in  finding  it?” 

“None  at  all.  Your  instructions  were  mi  >st  adequate.” 

“Let  me  introduce  you  now.  This  is  C.'hief  Superin- 
tendent Garroway.  Monsieur  Herculc  Poirot.” 

Garroway  was  a tall,  thin  man  with  a lean,  ascetic 
face,  gray  hak  which  left  a small  round  spot  like  a ton- 

72 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


sure,  so  that  he  had  a faint  resemblance  to  an  eccle- 
siastic. 

“This  is  wonderful,”  said  Poirot. 

“I  am  retired  now,  of  course,”  said  Garroway,  “but 
one  remembers.  Yes,  certain  things  one  remembers, 
although  they  are  past  and  gone,  and  the  general  pub- 
lic probably  remembers  nothing  about  them.  But  yes.” 

Hercule  Poirot  very  nearly  said  “Elephants  do  re- 
member,” but  checked  himself  in  time.  That  phrase 
was  so  associated  in  his  mind  now  with  Mrs.  Ariadne 
Oliver  that  he  found  it  difficult  to  restrain  it  from  his 
tongue  in  many  clearly  unsuitable  categories. 

“I  hope  you  have  not  been  getting  impatient,”  said 
Superintendent  Spence. 

He  pulled  forward  a chair,  and  the  three  men  sat 
down.  A menu  was  brought.  Superintendent  Spence, 
who  was  clearly  addicted  to  this  particular  restaurant, 
offered  tentative  words  of  advice.  Garroway  and  Poirot 
made  their  choice.  Then,  leaning  back  a little  in  their 
chairs  and  sipping  glasses  of  sherry,  they  contemplated 
each  other  for  some  minutes  in  silence  before  speaking. 

“I  must  apologize  to  you,”  said  Poirot,  “I  really  must 
apologize  to  you  for  coming  to  you  with  my  demands 
about  an  affair  which  is  over  and  done  with.” 

“What  interests  me,”  said  Spence,  “is  what  has  inter- 
ested you.  I thought  first  that  it  was  unlike  you  to  have 
this  wish  to  delve  in  the  past.  Is  it  connected  with  some- 
thing that  has  occurred  nowadays,  or  is  it  sudden  cu- 
riosity about  a rather  inexplicable,  perhaps,  case?  Do 
you  agree  with  that?” 

He  looked  across  the  table. 

“Inspector  Garroway,”  he  said,  “as  he  was  at  that 
time,  was  the  officer  in  charge  of  the  investigations  into 
the  Ravenscroft  shooting.  He  was  an  old  friend  of  mine 


73 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

and  SO  I had  no  difficulty  in  getting  in  touch  with  him.” 

“And  he  was  kind  enough  to  come  here  today  ” said 
Poirot,  “simply  because  I must  admit  to  a curiosity 
which 'l  am  sure  I have  no  right  to  feel  about  an  alfait 
that  is  past  and  done  with.” 

“WeU,  I wouldn’t  say  that,”  said  Garroway.  “We  afl 
have  interests  in  certain  cases  that  arc  past.  Oid  Lizzie 
Borden  really  kill  her  father  and  mother  with  an  ax? 
liere  are  people  who  stiil  do  not  think  .so.  Winy  killed 
3ravo  and  why?  There  arc  several  dilfcrent 
ideas,  mostly  not  very  well  founded.  But  still  people  try 
to  find  alternative  explanations.’ 

His  keen,  shrewd  eyes  looked  across  at  Poirot. 

“And  Monsieur  Poirot,  If  I am  not  mistaken,  has 
occasionally  shown  a leaning  towards  looking  into 
cases,  going  back,  shall  we  say,  for  murder,  back  into 
the  past,  twice,  perhaps  three  times.” 

“Three  times,  certainly,”  said  Superintendent  Spence. 

“Once,  I think  I am  right,  by  request  of  a Canadian 
girl.” 

“That  is  so,”  said  Poirot.  “A  Canadian  girl,  very  ve- 
hement, very  passionate,  very  forceful,  who  had  come 
here  to  investigate  a murder  for  which  her  mother  had 
been  condemned  to  death,  although  she  died  before  sen- 
tence was  carried  out.  Her  daughter  was  convinced 
that  her  mother  had  been  innocent.” 

“And  you  agreed?”  said  Garroway. 

“I  did  not  agree,”  said  Poirot,  “when  she  first  told 
me  of  the  matter.  But  she  was  very  vehement  and  very 
sure.” 

“It  was  natural  for  a daughter  to  wish  her  mother  to 
have  been  innocent  and  to  try  and  prove  against  all  ap- 
pearances that  she  was  innocent,”  said  Spence. 

“It  was  just  a little  mons  than  that,”  said  Poirot.  "She 

74 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


convinced  me  of  the  type  of  woman  her  mother  was.” 

“A  woman  incapable  of  murder?” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “it  would  be  very  difficult,  and  I 
am  sure  both  of  you  agree  with  me,  to  think  there  is 
anyone  quite  incapable  of  murder  if  one  knows  what 
kind  of  person  they  are,  what  led  up  to  it.  But  in  that 
particular  case,  the  mother  never  protested  her  in- 
nocence. She  appeared  to  be  quite  content  to  be  sen- 
tenced. That  was  curious  to  begin  with.  Was  she  a de- 
featist? It  did  not  seem  so.  When  I began  to  inquire,  it 
became  clear  that  she  was  not  a defeatist.  She  was, 
one  would  say,  almost  the  opposite  of  it.” 

Garroway  looked  interested.  He  leaned  across  the 
table,  twisting  a bit  of  bread  off  the  roll  on  his  plate. 

“And  was  she  innocent?” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot.  “She  was  innocent.” 

“And  that  surprised  you?” 

“Not  by  the  time  I realized  it,”  said  Poirot.  “There 
were  one  or  two  things — one  thing  in  particular — that 
showed  she  could  not  have  been  guilty.  One  fact  that 
nobody  had  appreciated  at  the  time.  Knowing  that,  one 
had  only  to  look  at  what  there  was,  shall  we  say,  on  the 
menu  in  the  way  of  looking  elsewhere.”* 

Grilled  trout  was  put  in  front  of  them  at  this  point. 

“There  was  another  case,  too,  where  you  looked  into 
the  past,  not  quite  in  the  same  way,”  continued  Spence. 
“A  girl  who  said  at  a party  that  she  had  once  seen  a 
murder  committed.”t 

“There  again  one  had  to — ^how  shall  I put  it? — ^step 
backward  instead  of  forward,”  said  Poirot.  “Yes,  that  is 
very  true.” 

*Murder  in  Retrospect.  [English  title;  Five  Link  Pigs.} 
tHallowe’en  Party. 


75 


ELEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

“And  had  the  girl  seen  the  murder  committed  ? 

“No  ” said  Poirot,  “because  it  was  the  wrong  girl. 
This  trout  is  delicious,”  he  added  with  appreciati(m. 

“They  do  aU  fish  dishes  very  well  here,”  said  Super- 
intendent Spence.  ~ , 

He  helped  himself  from  the  sauce  boat  proffered  to 

him. 

“A  most  delicious  sauce,”  he  added. 

Silent  appreciation  of  food  filled  the  next  thicc  niin- 

llt&S. 

“When  Spence  came  along  to  me,”  said  Superinten- 
dent Garroway,  “asking  if  I remembered  anything 
about  the  Ravenscroft  case,  i was  intrigued  and  de- 
lighted at  once.” 

“You  haven’t  forgotten  all  about  it?” 

“Not  the  Ravenscroft  case.  It  wasn’t  an  easy  case  to 
forget  about.” 

“You  agree,”  said  Poirot,  “that  there  were  discrep, 
ancies  about  it?  Lack  of  proof,  alternative  .Holuti<ms?” 

“No,”  said  Garroway,  “nothing  of  that  kind.  All  the 
evidence  recorded  the  visible  facts.  Deaths  of  which 
there  were  several  former  examples,  yes,  all  plain  sail- 
ing. And  yet — ” 

“Well?”  said  Poirot. 

“And  yet  it  was  all  wrong,”  said  Garroway. 

“Ah,”  said  Spence. 

He  looked  interested. 

‘That’s  what  you  felt  once,  isn’t  it?”  .saiil  Poirot,  turn- 
ing to  him. 

“In  the  case  of  Mrs.  McGinty.  Ye.s." 

“You  weren’t  satLslied,”  said  Poirot,  “when  that 
extremely  difficult  young  man  wa.s  arrested.  1 fe  had  ev- 
ery reason  for  doing  it,  he  lurked  us  though  he  hud  done 
it,' everyone  thought  he  had  dtme  it.  Ihit  you  knew  he 
h^’t  toe  it  You  were  so  sure  of  it  that  you  came  to 


76 


ElEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

me  and  told  me  to  go  along  to  see  what  I could  find  out.” 

“See  if  you  could  help — and  you  did  help,  didn’t 
you?”  said  Spence. 

Poirot  sighed. 

“Fortunately,  yes.  But  what  a tiresome  young  man  he 
was.  If  ever  a young  man  deserved  to  be  hung,  not  be- 
' cause  he  had  done  a murder  but  because  he  wouldn’t 
help  anyone  to  prove  that  he  hadn’t.  Now  we  have  the 
Ravenscroft  case.  You  say.  Superintendent  Garroway, 
something  was  wrong?” 

“Yes,  I felt  quite  sure  of  it  if  you  understand  what 
I mean.” 

“I  do  understand,”  said  Poirot.  “And  so  does  Spence. 
One  does  come  across  these  things  sometimes.  The 
proofs  are  there,  the  motive,  the  opportunity,  the  clues, 
the  mise  en  scdne,  it’s  all  there.  A complete  blueprint, 
as  you  might  say.  But  all  the  same,  those  whose  pro- 
fession it  is,  know.  They  know  that  it’s  all  wrong,  just 
like  a critic  in  the  artistic  world  knows  when  a picture 
is  all  wrong.  Knows  when  it’s  a fake  and  not  the  real 
thing.” 

“There  wasn’t  anything  I could  do  about  it,  either,” 
said  Superintendent  Garroway.  “I  looked  into  it,  around 
it,  up  above  it  and  down  below  it,  as  you  might  say.  I 
talked  to  the  people.  There  was  nothing  there.  It  looked 
like  a suicide  pact,  it  had  all  the  marks*  of  the  suicide 
pact.  Alternatively,  of  course,  it  could  be  a husband 
who  shot  a wife  and  then  himself,  or  a wife  who  shot 
her  husband  and  then  herself.  All  those  three  things  hap- 
pen. When  one  comes  across  them,  one  knows  they 
have  happened.  But  in  most  cases  one  has  some  idea  of 
why.” 

“There  wasn’t  any  real  idea  of  why  in  this  case,  was 
that  it?”  said  Poirot. 

“Yes.  That’s  it  You  see,  the  moment  you  begin  to  in- 


77 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

quire  into  a case,  to  inquire  about  people  and  things, 
you  get  a very  good  picture  as  a rule  of  what  (heir  lives 
have  been  hke.  This  was  a couple,  aging,  the  husband 
with  a good  record,  a wife  affectionate,  pleasant,  on 
good  terms  together.  That’s  a thing  one  soon  finds  out 
about  They  were  happy  living  together.  'I'hey  went  for 
walks,  they  played  picquet,  and  poker  patience  with 
each  other  in  the  evcning.s.  They  had  children  who 
caused  them  no  particular  anxiety,  A boy  in  school  in 
England  and  a girl  in  a pensUmnat  in  Switzerland.  'I’here 
was  nothing  wrong  with  their  livc.s  as  far  as  one  could 
tell.  From  such  medical  evidence  as  one  cuuki  obtain, 
there  was  nothing  definitely  wrong  wiili  their  health. 
The  husband  had  suffered  from  hig.li  blood  pre.ssure  at 
one  time,  but  was  in  good  condition  by  the  taking  of 
suitable  medicaments  which  kept  him  on  an  even  keel. 
His  wife  was  slightly  deaf  and  had  had  :i  little  minor 
heart  trouble,  nothing  to  be  worried  ahont.  Of  course  it 
could  be,  as  does  happen  somctime.s,  tlmt  one  or  other 
of  them  had  fears  for  their  health.  There  are  a lot  of 
people  who  arc  in  good  itcalth  but  are  t|iiite  convinced 
they  have  cancer,  arc  quite  sure  fhttf  they  won’t  live 
another  year.  Sometimes  that  iead.s  to  their  lakijtg  their 
own  life.  The  Ravcnscrofts  didn’t  seetn  that  kimi  of  peo- 
ple. They  seemed  well  balanced  tmd  plaeiiL” 

“So  what  did  you  really  think?”  said  Eoirot. 

“The  trouble  is  that  1 couldn’t  think,  l.ooking  back, 
I say  to  myself  it  was  suicide.  It  cinild  «mly  have  been 
suicide.  For  some  reason  or  other  they  ticeided  that 
life  was  unbearable  to  them.  Not  through  fintuKid 
trouble,  not  through  health  diflicultics,  not  because  of 
unhappincs,s.  And  there,  you  see,  1 vmw  to  a full  stop, 
It  had  all  the  marks  of  suicide.  I ennmn  .sec  any  other 
thing  that  could  have  happened  except  suicide,  'fitey 

78 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

went  for  a walk.  On  that  walk  they  took  a revolver  with 
them.  The  revolver  lay  between  the  two  bodies.  There 
were  blurred  fingerprints  of  both  of  them.  Both  of  them 
in  fact  had  handled  it,  but  there  was  nothing  to  show 
who  had  fired  it  last.  One  tends  to  think  the  husband 
perhaps  shot  his  wife  and  then  himself.  That  is  only  be- 
cause it  seems  more  likely.  Well,  why?  A great  many 
years  have  passed.  When  something  reminds  me  now 
and  again,  something  I read  in  the  papers  of  bodies,  a 
husband  and  wife’s  bodies  somewhere,  lying  dead,  hav- 
ing taken  their  own  lives  apparently,  I think  back  and 
then  I wonder  again  what  happened  in  the  Ravenscroft 
case.  Twelve  years  ago  or  fourteen  and  I still  remem- 
ber the  Raven.scroCt  case  and  wonder — well,  just  the 
one  word,  I think.  Why — why — why?  Did  the  husband 
really  hate  his  wife,  and  had  hated  her  for  a long  time? 
Did  the  wife  really  hate  her  husband  and  want  to  get 
rid  of  him?  Did  they  go  on  hating  each  other  until  they 
could  bear  it  no  longer?” 

Garroway  broke  off  another  piece  of  bread  and 
chewed  at  it. 

“You  got  some  idea.  Monsieur  Poirot?  Has  somebody  ^ 
come  to  you  and  told  you  something  that  has  awakened 
your  interest  particularly?  Do  you  know  something  that 
might  explain  the  ‘Why’?” 

“No.  All  the  same,”  said  Poirot,  “you  must  have  had 
a theory.  Come  now,  you  had  a theory?” 

“You’re  quite  right,  of  course.  One  does  haye  theo- 
ries. One  expects  them  all,  or  one  of  them  at  least,  to 
work  out,  but  they  don’t  usually.  I think  that  my  theory 
was  in  the  end  that  you  couldn’t  look  for  the  cause,  be- 
cause one  didn’t  know  enough.  What  did  I know  about 
them?  General  Ravcn.scroft  was  close  on  sixty;  his  wife 
was  thirty-five,  AH  1 knew  of  them,  strictly  speaking. 


79 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

was  the  last  five  or  six  years  of  their  lives.  The  General 
had  retired  on  a pension.  They  had  come  back  to  En- 
sJand  from  abroad  and  all  the  evidence  that  came  to 
me  all  the  knowledge,  was  of  a brief  period  during 
which  they  had  first  a house  at  Bournemouth  and  then 
moved  to  where  they  lived  in  the  home  where  the  trag. 
edy  took  place.  They  had  lived  there  peacefully,  hap- 
pily  their  children  came  home  there  for  school  holi- 
dayL  It  was  a peaceful  period,  I should  say,  at  the  end 
i of  what  one  presumed  as  a peacelul  life.  But  then  I 
' thought,  but  how  much  did  I know  of  that  poaeeful  life? 
I knew  of  their  life  after  retirement  in  England,  of  their 
family.  There  was  no  financial  motive,  no  motive  of 
hatred,  no  motive  of  sexual  involvement,  of  intrusive 
love  ^airs.  No.  But  there  wav  a period  before  that 
What  did  I know  about  that?  What  I knew  wtis  a life 
spent  mostly  abroad  with  occasional  visit.s  home,  a 
good  record  for  the  man,  pleasant  remembrances  of  her 
from  friends  of  the  wife’s.  There  was  no  outstanding 
tragedy,  dispute,  nothing  that  one  knew  of.  But  then  I 
mightn’t  have  known.  One  doesn’t  know.  I'hcre  was  a 
period  of,  say,  twenty-thirty  years,  years  from  cfiild- 
hood  to  the  time  they  married,  the  time  they  lived 
abroad  in  India  and  other  places.  Perhaps  the  root  of 
the  tragedy  was  there.  There  is  a proverb  my  grand- 
mother used  to  repeat:  Old  sltw  heivt'  knm  shtuUms. 
Was  the  cause  of  death  .some  long  shadow,  ti  sfiadew 
from  the  past?  That’s  not  an  easy  thing  to  Rad  out  about 
You  find  out  about  a man’s  record,  what  friciuls  or  ac- 
quaintances say,  but  you  don’t  know  any  inner  ticiails. 
Well,  I think  'littlc  by  little  the  theory  grew  up  in  my 
mind  that  tliat  would  have  been  the  place  to  it>ok,  if  I 
could  have  looked.  Something  that  had  hapf'cm-d  then, 
ia  another  country,  perhaps.  Sometliiitg  that  had  been 

80 


' ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

thought  to  be  forgotten,  to  have  passed  out  of  exis- 
tence, but  which  still  perhaps  existed.  A grudge  from 
the  past,  some  happening  that  nobody  knew  about,  tliat 
had  happened  elsewhere,  not  in  their  life  in  England, 
but  which  may  have  been  there.  If  one  had  known 
where  to  look  for  it.” 

“Not  the  sort  of  thing,  you  mean,”  said  Poirot,  “that 
anybody  would  remember.  I mean,  remember  now- 
adays. Something  that  no  friends  of  theirs  in  England, 
perhaps,  would  have  known  about.” 

“Their  friends  in  England  seem  to  have  been  mostly 
made  since  retirement,  though  I suppose  old  friends 
did  come  and  visit  them  or  see  them  occasionally.  But 
one  doesn’t  hear  about  things  that  happened  in  the  past. 
People  forget.” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot  thoughtfully.  “People  forget.” 

“They’re  not  like  elephants,”  ssdd  Superintendent 
Garroway,  giving  a faint  smile.  “Elephants,  they  always 
say,  remember  everything.” 

“It  is  odd  that  you  should  say  that,”  said  Poirot 

“That  I should  say  about  long  sins?” 

“Not  so  much  that  It  was  your  mention  of  elephants 
that  interested  me.” 

Superintendent  Garroway  looked  at  Poirot  with  some 
surprise.  He  seemed  to  be  waiting  for  more.  Spence  also 
cast  a quick  glance  at  his  old  Mend.  ' 

“Something  that  happened  in  India,  perhaps,”  he 
suggested.  “1  mean — well,  that’s  where  elephants  come 
from,  jsn’t  it?  Or  from  Africa.  Anyway,  who’s  been  talk- 
ing to  you  about  elephants?”  he  added. 

“A  friend  of  mine  happened  to  mention  them,”  said 
Poirot.  “Someone  you  know,”  he  said  to  Superinten- 
dent Spence.  “Mrs.  Oliver.” 

“Oh,  Mrs.  Ariadne  Oliver,  Well!”  He  padsed. 

81 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“Well  what?”  said  Poirot.  .. 

“Well  does  she  know  something,  then,  he  asked. 

“I  do  not  think  so  as  yet,”  said  Poirot,  “but  she  might 
know  something  before  very  long.”  He  added  Aought- 

fully,  “She’s  that'  kind  of  person.  She  gets  around,  if  you 

know  what  I mean.”  , 

“Yes  ” said  Spence.  “Yes.  Has  she  got  any  ideas?” 


“Do  you  mean  Mrs.  Ariadne  Oliver,  the  writer?” 
asked  Garroway  with  some  interest. 

“That’s  the  one,”  said  Spence.  . „ ^ , 

“Does  she  know  a good  deal  about  crime.'  1 know 
she  writes  crime  stories.  I’ve  never  known  where  she  got 

her  ideas  from  or  her  facts.”  ^ 

“Her  ideas,”  said  Poirot,  “come  out  of  her  head.  Her 
facts— weU,  that’s  more  difficult.”  He  paused  for  a mo- 


“What  are  you  thinking  of,  Poirot?  Something  in  par- 
ticular?” j , • 

“Yes  ” said  Poirot.  “I  rained  one  ol  her  stones  once, 

or  so  sL  tells  me.  She  had  just  had  a very  good  idea 
about  a fact,  something  that  had  to  do  with  a long- 
gjggYg(j  vvoolen  vest.  I asked  her  something  over  the 
telephone  and  it  put  the  idea  for  the  stoiy  tmt  of  hei 
head.  She  reproaches  me  at  intervals.” 

“Dear,  dear,”  said  Spence.  “Sounds  rather  like  that 
parsley  that  sank  into  the  butter  on  a hot  day.  You 
know.  Sherlock  Holmes  and  the  dog  who  did  nothing 
in  the  nighttime.” 

“Did  they  have  a dog?”  asked  Poirot. 

“I  beg  your  pardon?” 

“I  said  did  they  have  a dog?  Genera!  ami  Mrs.  Ear 
venscroft.  Did  they  take  a dog  for  that  walk  with  them 
on  the  day  they  were  shot?  The  Ravenscrofts.” 

“They  had  a dog — yes”  said  Garroway.  “1  suppose, 

82 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

I suppose  they  did  take  him  for  a walk  most  days.” 

“If  it  had  been  one  of  Mrs.  Oliver’s  stories,”  said 
Spence,  “you  ought  to  have  foimd  the  dog  howling  over 
the  two  dead  bodies.  But  that  didn’t  happen.” 

Garroway  shook  his  head. 

“I  wonder  where  the  dog  is  now?”  said  Poirot. 

“Buried  in  somebody’s  garden,  I expect,”  said  Garro- 
way. “It’s  fourteen  years  ago.” 

“So  we  can’t  go  and  ask  the  dog,  can  we?”  said  Poi- 
rot. He  added  thoughtfully,  “A  pity.  It’s  astonishing, 
you  know,  what  dogs  can  know.  Who  was  there  exact- 
ly in  the  house?  I mean  on  the  day  when  the  crime  hap- 
pened?” 

“I  brought  you  a list,”  said  Superintendent  Garroway. 
“in  case  you  like  to  consult  it.  Mrs.  Whittaker,  the  elder- 
ly cook-housekeeper.  It  was  her  day  out,  so  we  couldn’t 
get  much  from  her  that  was  helpful.  A visitor  was  stay- 
ing there  who  had  been  governess  to  the  Ravenscroft 
children  once,  I believe.  Mrs.  Whittaker  was  rather 
deaf  and  slightly  blind.  She  couldn’t  tell  us  anything  of 
interest,  except  that  recently  Lady  Ravenscroft  had 
been  in  hospital  or  in  a nursing  home — ^for  nerves  but 
not  illness,  apparently.  There  was  a gardener,  too.” 

“But  a stranger  might  have  come  from  outside.  A 
stranger  from  the  past.  That’s  your  idea,  Superintendent 
Garroway?” 

“Not  so  much  an  idea  as  just  a theory.” 

Poirot  was  silent,  he  was  thinking  of  a time  when  he 
had  asked  to  go  back  into  the  past,  had  stuched  five  peo- 
ple out  of  the  past  who  had  reminded  him  of  the  nurses 
rhyme  “Five  little  pigs.”  Interesting  it  had  been,  and  in 
the  end  rewarding,  because  he  had  found  out  the  truth. 


83 


6. 

AN  OLD  FRIEND  REMEMBERS 


When  Mrs.  Oliver  returned  to  the  house  the  following 
morning,  she  found  Miss  Livingstone  waiting  for  her. 

“There  have  been  two  telephone  calls,  Mrs.  Oliver.” 

“Yes?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“The  first  one  was  from  Crichton  and  Smith.  They 
wanted  to  know  whether  you  had  chosen  the  liine-green 
brocade  or  the  pale  blue  one.” 

“I  haven’t  made  up  my  mind  yet,”  .said  Mrs.  Oliver. 
“Just  remind  me  tomorrow  morning,  will  you?  I’d  like  to 
see  it  by  night  light.” 

“And  the  other  was  from  a foreigner,  a Mr.  Heredes 
Poirot,  I believe.” 

“Oh,  yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “What  did  he  want?” 

“He  asked  if  you  would  be  able  to  call  and  see  him 
tMs  afternoon.” 


84 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBES 

“That  will  be  quite  impossible,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 
'■Ring  him  up,  will  you?  I’ve  got  to  go  out  again  at  once, 
as  a matter  of  fact.  Did  he  leave  a telephone  number?” 

“Yes,  he  did.” 

‘That’s  all  right,  then.  We  won’t  have  to  look  it  up 
again.  All  right.  Just  ring  him.  Tell  him  I’m  sorry  that  I 
can’t  but  that  I’m  out  on  the  track  of  an  elephant.” 

“I  beg  your  pardon?”  said  Miss  Livingstone. 

“Say  that  I’m  on  the  track  of  an  elephant.” 

“Oh,  yes,”  said  Miss  Livingstone,  looking  shrewdly 
at  her  employer  to  see  if  she  was  right  in  the  feelings 
that  she  sometimes  had  that  Mrs.  Ariadne  Oliver,  though 
a successful  novelist,  was  at  the  same  time  not  quite 
right  in  the  head. 

“I’ve  never  hunted  elephants  before,”  said  Mrs.  Oli- 
ver. “It’s  quite  an  interesting  thing  to  do,  though.” 

She  went  into  the  sitting  room,  opened  the  top  volume 
of  die  assorted  books  on  the  sofa,  most  of  them  looking 
Yather  the  worse  for  wear,  since  she  had  toiled  through 
them  the  evening  before  and  written  out  a paper  with 
various  addresses.  s' 

“Well,  one  has  got  to  make  a start  somewhere,”  she 
said.  “On  the  whole  I think  that  if  Julia  hasn’t  gone 
completely  off  her  rocker  by  now,  I might  start  with’  her. 
She  always  had  ideas,  and  after  all,  she  knew  that  part 
of^thc  countiy  because  she  lived  near  there.  Yes,  I think 
we’ll  start  with  Julia.” 

“There  are  four  letters  for  you  here  to  sign,”  said  Miss 
Livingstone. 

“I  can’t  be  bothered  now,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  "I  really 
can’t  spare  a moment.  I’ve  got  to  go  doym  to  Hampton 
Court,  and  it’s  quite  a long  ride.” 

The  Honorable  Julia  Carstairs,  struggling  with  some 
riight  dillieulty  out  of  her  armchair,  the  difficulty  that 

85 


ELEPHANTS  GAN  REMEMBER 

those  over  the  age  of  seventy  have  when  rising  to  their 
feet  after  prolonged  rest,  even  a possible  nap,  stepped 
forward,  peering  a little  to  see  who  it  was  who  had  just 
been  announced  by  the  faithful  retainer  who  shared  the 
apartment  which  she  occupied  in  her  status  of  a mem- 
her  of  “Homes  for  the  Privileged.”  Being  sKghtly  deaf, 
the  name  had  not  come  clearly  to  her.  Mrs.  GulUver. 
Was  that  it?  But  she  didn’t  remember  a Mrs.  Gulliver. 
She  advanced  on  slightly  shaky  knees,  stiU  peering 
forward. 

‘‘I  don’t  expect  youll  remember  me,  it  s so  many 
years  since  we  met.” 

Like  many  elderly  people,  Mrs.  Carstairs  could  re- 
member voices  better  than  she  did  faces. 

“Why,”  she  exclaimed,  “it’s— dear  me,  it’s  Ariadne! 

My  dear,  how  very  nice  to  see  you.” 

Greetings  passed. 

“I  just  happened  to  be  in  this  part  of  the  world,”  ex- 
plained Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  had  to  come  down  to  see  some- 
one not  far  from  here.  And  then  I remembered  that 
looking  in  my  address  book  last  night  I had  seen  that 
this  was  quite  near  where  you  had  your  apartment 

Delightful,  isn’t  it?”  she  added,  looking  round. 

“Not  too  bad,”  said  Mrs.  Carstairs.  “Not  quite  all  it’s 
written  up  to  be,  you  know.  But  it  has  many  ad- 
vantages. One  brings  one’s  own  furniture  and  things  Hke 
that,  and  there  is  a central  restaurant  where  you  can 
have  a meal,  or  you  can  have  your  own  things,  of  course. 
Oh,  yes,  it’s  very  good,  really.  The  grounds  are  charming 
and  well-kept-up.  But  sit  down,  Ariadne;  do  sit  dom 
You  look  very  well.  I saw  you  were  at  a literary  lunch 
the  other  day,  in  the  paper.  How  odd  it  is  that  one  just 
sees  something  in  the  paper  and  almost  the  next  day  one 
meets  tide  person.  Quite  extraordinary.” 

86 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“I  know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  taking  the  chair  that  was 
offered  her.  “Things  do  go  like  that,  don’t  they?” 

“You  are  still  living  in  London?” 

Mrs.  Oliver  said  yes,  she  was  still  living  in  London. 
She  then  entered  into  what  she  thought  of  in  her  own 
mind,  with  vague  memories  of  going  to  dancing  class  as 
a child,  the  first  figure  of  the  Lancers.  Advance,  re- 
treat, hands  out,  turn  round  twice,  whirl  round,  and  so 
on. 

She  inquired  after  Mrs.  Carstairs’s  daughter  and 
about  the  two  grandchildren,  and  she  asked  about  the 
other  daughter,  what  she  was  doing.  She  appeared  to 
be  doing  it  in  New  Zealand.  Mrs.  Carstairs  did  not 
seem  to  be  quite  sure  what  it  was.  Some  kind  of  social 
research.  Mrs.  Carstairs  pressed  an  electric  bell  that 
rested  on  the  arm  of  her  chair,  and  ordered  Emma  to 
bring  tea.  Mrs.  Oliver  begged  her  not  to  bother.  Julia 
Carstairs  said: 

“Of  course  Ariadne  has  got  to  have  tea.” 

The  two  ladies  leaned  back.  The  second  and  third 
figures  of  the  Lancers.  Old  friends.  Other  people’s 
children.  The  death  of  friends. 

“It  must  be  years  since  I saw  you  last,”  said  Mrs.  Car- 
stairs. 

“I  think  it  was  at  the  Llewellyns’  wedding,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver. 

“Yes,  that  must  have  been  about  it.  How  terrible 
Moira  looked  as  a bridesmaid.  That  dreadfully  unbe- 
coming shade  of  apricot  they  wore.” 

“I  know.  It  didn’t  suit  them.” 

“I  don’t  think  weddings  are  nearly  as  pretty  as  they 
used  to  be  in  our  day.  Some  of  them  seem  to  wear  such 
very  peculiar  clothes.  The  other  day  one  of  my  friends 
Went  to  a wedding  and  she  said  the  bridegroom  was 


87 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

dressed  in  some  sort  of  quilted  white  satin  and  ruffles  at 
his  neck.  Made  of  Valenciennes  lace,  I believe.  Most 
pecuUar.  And  the  girl  was  wearing  a very  peculiar 
trouser  suit.  Also  white,  but  it  was  stamped  with  greea 

shamrocks  all  over. 

“Well,  my  dear  Ariadne,  can  you  imagine  it.  Really,, 
extraordinary.  In  church,  too.  If  I’d  been  a clergymM, 
I’d  have  refused  to  marry  them.” 

Tea  came.  Talk  continued. 

“I  saw  my  goddaughter,  Celia  Ravenscroft,  the  other 
day,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Do  you  remember  the  Ravens- 
crofts?  Of  course,  it’s  a great  maiiy  years  ago.” 

“The  Ravenscrofts?  Now  wait  a minute.  That  was 
that  very  sad  tragedy,  wasn’t  it?  A double  suicide,  didn’t 
they  think  it  was?  Near  their  house  at  Overcliffe.” 

“You’ve  got  such  a wonderful  memory,  Julia,”  sad 
Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Always  had.  Though  I have  difficulties  with  names 
sometimes.  Yes,  it  was  very  tragic,  wasn’t  it?” 

“Very  tragic  indeed.” 

“One  of  my  cousins  knew  them  very  well  in  India, 
Roddy  Foster,  you  know.  General  Ravenscroft  had  had 
a most  distinguished  career.  Of  course  he  was  a bit  deaf 
by  the  time  he  retired.  He  didn’t  always  hear  what  one 
said  very  well.” 

“Do  you  remember  them  quite  well?” 

“Oh,  yes.  One  doesn’t  really  forget  people,  does  one? 
I mean,  they  lived  at  Overcliffe  for  quite  five  or  sit 
years.” 

‘T’ve  forgotten  her  Christian  name  now,”  said  Mb. 
Oliver. 

“Muriel,  I think.  But  everyone  called  her  Molly. 
Yes,  Muriel.  So  many  people  were  called  Muriel, 
weren’t  ffiey,  at  about  that  time?  She  used  to  wear  a. 
wig,  do  you  remember?” 


88 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Oh,  yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “At  least  I can’t  quite 
remember,  but  I think  I do.” 

“I’m  not  sure  she  didn’t  try  to  persuade  me  to  get 
one.  She  said  it  was  so  useful  when  you  went  abroad 
and  traveled.  She  had  four  different  wigs.  One  for  eve- 
ning and  one  for  traveling  and  one — ^very  strange,  you 
know.  You  could  put  a hat  on  over  it  and  not  really  dis- 
arrange it.” 

“I  didn’t  know  them  as  well  as  you  did,”  smd  Mrs. 
Oliver.  “And  of  course  at  the  time  of  the  shooting  I was 
in  America  on  a lecture  tour.  So  I never  really  heard 
any  details.” 

“Well,  of  course,  it  was  a great  mystery,”  said  Julia 
Carstairs.  “I  mean  to  say,  one  didn’t  know.  There  were 
so  many  different  stories  going  about.” 

“What  did  they  say  at  the  inquest — I suppose  they 
had  an  inquest?” 

“Oh,  yes,  of  course.  The  police  had  to  investigate  it. 
It  was  one  of  those  indecisive  things,  you  know,  in  that 
the  death  was  due  to  revolver  shots.  They  couldn’t  say 
definitely  what  had  occurred.  It  seemed  possible  that 
General  Ravenscroft  had  shot  his  wife  and  then  himself, 
but  apparently  it  was  just  as  probable  that  Lady  Ra- 
venscroft had  shot  her  husband  and  then  herself.  It 
seemed  most  likely,  I think,  that  it  was  a suicide  pact, 
but  it  couldn’t  be  said  definitely  how  it  came  about” 

“There  seemed  to  be  no  question  of  its  being  a crime?” 

“No,  no.  It  was  said  quite  clearly  there  was  no  sug- 
gestion of  foul  play.  I mean  there  were  no  footsteps  or 
any  signs  of  anyone  coming  near  them.  They  left  the 
house  to  walk  after  tea,  as  they  so  often  did.  They  didn’t 
come  back  again  for  dinner  and  the  manservant  or 
somebody  or  the  gardener — ^whoever  it  was— went  out 
to  look  for  them,  and  found  them  both  dead.  The  re- 
volver was  lying  by  tihe  bodies.” 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“The  revolver  belonged  to  him,  didn  t it? 

“oi  ves  He  had  two  revolvers  in  the  house.  These 
ex-militmy  people  so  often  do,  don’t  they?  I mean,  they 
feel  safer  what  with  everything  that  goes  on  nowadays. 
A second  revolver  was  still  in  the  drawer  m the  house, 
so' that  he-weU,  he  must  have  gone  out  deliberately 
with  the  revolver,  presumably.  I don’t  think  it  likely  that 
she’d  have  gone  out  for  a walk  carrying  a revolver. 

“No.  No,  it  wouldn’t  have  been  so  easy,  would  it? 

“But  there  was  nothing  apparenUy  in  the  evidence  to 
show  that  there  was  any  unhappiness  or  Unit  thcre’d 
been  .any  quarrel  between  them  or  that  there  was  any 
reason  why  they  should  commit  suicide.  Of  course  one 
never  knows  what  sad  things  there  are  in  people’s 

^*^“No,  no,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “One  never  knows.  How 
very  trae  that  is,  Julia.  Did  you  have  any  idcr 


self?”  , „ 

“Well,  one  always  wonders,  my  dear. 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “one  always  wonders.” 

“It  might  be  of  course,  you  see,  that  he  had  some  dis- 
ease. I think  he  might  have  been  told  he  was  going  to 
die  of  cancer,  but  that  wasn’t  so,  according  to  the  medi- 
cal evidence.  He  was  quite  healthy.  I mean,  he  had— I 
think  he  had  had  a— what  do  they  call  those  things?— 
coronary,  is  that  what  I mean?  It  sounds  like  a crown, 
doesn’t  it,  but  it’s  really  a heart  attack,  isn’t  it?  He’d 
had  that  but  he’d  recovered  from  it,  and  she  was,  well, 
she  was  very  nervy.  She  was  neurotic  always.” 

“Yes,  I seem  to  remember  that,”  said  Mrs,  Oliver. 
“Of  course  I didn’t  know  them  well,  but—”  sfie  asked 
suddenly — “was  she  wearing  a wig?” 

“Oh.  Well,  you  know,  I can’t  really  remember  that 
She  always  wore  her  wig.  One  of  them,  I mean.” 

“1  just  wondered,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Soniehtw  I feel 

90 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

if  you  were  going  to  shoot  yourself  or  even  shoot  your 
husband,  I don’t  think  you’d  wear  your  wig,  do  you?” 

The  ladies  discussed  this  point  with  some  interest. 

“What  do  you  really  think,  Julia?” 

“Well,  as  I said,  dear,  one  wonders,  you  know.  There 
were  things  said,  but  then  there  always  are.” 

“About  him  or  her?” 

“Well,  they  said  that  there  was  a young  woman,  you 
know.  Yes,  I think  she  did  some  secretarial  work  for 
him.  He  was  writing  his  memoirs  of  his  career  in  India 
— I believe  commissioned  by  a publisher  at  that — and 
she  used  to  take  dictation  from  him.  But  some  people 
said — well,  you  know  what  they  do  say  sometimes,  that 
perhaps  he  had  got — er — tied  up  with  this  girl  in  some 
way.  She  wasn’t  very  young.  She  was  over  thirty,  and 
not  very  good-looking  and  I don’t  think — there  were 
no  scandals  about  her  or  anything,  but  still,  one  doesn’t 
know.  People  thought  he  might  have  shot  his  wife  be- 
cause he  wanted  to — well,  he  might  have  wanted  to 
marry  her,  yes.  But  I don’t  really  think  people  said  that 
sort  of  thing  and  I never  believed  it” 

“What  did  you  think?” 

“Well,  of  course  I wondered  a little  about  her." 

“You  mean  tliat  a man  was  mentioned?” 

“I  believe  there  was  something  out  in  Malaya.  Some 
kind  of  story  I heard  about  her.  That  she  got  embroiled 
with  some  young  man  much  younger  than  hersett. 
And  her  husband  hadn’t  liked  it  much  and  it  had  caused 
a bit  of  scandal.  I forget  where.  But  anyway,  that  was 
a long  time  ago  and  I don’t  think  anything  ever  came 
of  it.” 

“You  don’t  think  there  was  any  talk  nearer  home? 
No  special  relationship  with  anyone  in  the  neighbor- 
hood? There  wasn’t  any  ewdence  of  quarrels  between 
them,  or  anything  of  that  kind?” 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“No,  I don’t  think  so.  Of  course  I read  everything 
about  it  at  the  time.  One 'did  discuss  it,  of  course,  be- 
cause one  couldn’t  help  feeling  there  might  be  some- 
well,  some  really  very  tragic  love  stoiy  conucctcd  with 

it.” 

“But  there  wasn’t,  you  think?  They  had  children, 
didn’t  they?  There  was  my  goddaughter,  of  course.” 

“Oh,  yes,  and  there  was  a son.  i tliiuk  he  was  quite 
young-At  school  somewhere.  The  girl  was  only  twelve, 
no— older  than  that.  She  was  with  a family  in  Switzer- 
land.” 

“There  was  no — no  mental  trouble,  1 suppose,  in  the 
family?” 

“Oh,  you  mean  the  boy— yes,  riiiaht  be,  (»f  course. 
You  do  hear  very  .strange  things.  T'herc  was  that  boy 
who  shot  his  father— that  was  .somewhere  uctir  New- 
castle, I think.  Some  years  before  fhal.  Yt)u  kfiow.  He’d 
been  very  depressed  and  at  first  1 tliiuk  llicy  stiid  he 
tried  to  hang  himself  when  lie  was  :it  the  imiversity, 
and  then  he  came  and  shot  his  father.  But  nobody 
quite  knew  why.  Anyway,  there  vv.'tsn’t  anything  of  that 
sort  with  the  Ravenscrofts.  Nt>,  ! don't  think  so,  in  fact, 
I’m  pretty  sure  of  it.  I can’t  help  thinking,  in  some 
ways — ” 

“Yes,  Julia?” 

“I  can’t  help  thinking  that  there  might  have  been 
a man,  you  know.” 

“You  mean  that  she-—?" 

“Yes,  well— well,  one  thinks  it  rather  likely,  you 
know.  The  wigs,  for  one  thing.” 

“I  don’t  quite  .see  how  the  wigs  come  into  it.” 

“Well,  wanting  to  improve  her  appearance.” 

“She  was  thirty-five,  I think.” 

“More.  More.  Thirty-six,  I think.  And,  well,  I know 

92 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

she  showed  me  the  wigs  one  day,  and  one  or  two  of 
them  really  made  her  look  quite  attractive.  And  she 
used  a good  deal  of  make-up.  And  that  had  all  started 
just  after  they  had  come  to  live  there,  I think.  She  was 
rather  a good-looking  woman.” 

“You  mean,  she  might  have  met  someone — some 

man?” 

“Well,  that’s  what  I’ve  always  thought,”  said  Mrs. 
Carstairs.  “You  see,  if  a man’s  getting  off  with  a girl, 
people  notice  it  usually  because  men  aren’t  so  good  at 
hiding  their  tracks.  But  a woman,  it  might  be — well,  I 
mean  like  someone  she’d  met  and  nobody  knew  much 
about  it.” 

“Oh,  do  you  really  think  so,  Julia?” 

“No,  I don’t  really  think  so,”  said  Julia,  “because  I 
mean,  people  always  do  know,  don’t  they?  I mean,  you 
know,  servants  know,  or  gardeners  or  bus  drivers.  Or 
somebody  in  the  neighborhood.  And  they  know.  And 
they  talk.  But  still,  there  could  have  been  something  like 
that  and  either  he  found  out  about  it . . 

“You  mean  it  was  a crime  of  jealousy?” 

“I  think  so,  yes.” 

“So  you  think  it’s  more  likely  that  he  shot  her,  then 
himself,  than  that  she  shot  him  and  then  herself.” 

“Well,  I should  think  so,  because  I think  if  she  were 
trying  to  get  rid  of  him — ^well,  I don’t  think  they’d  have 
gone  for  a walk  together  and  she’d  have  to  have  taken 
the  revolver  with  her  in  a handbag  and  it  would  have 
been  rather  a bigger  handbag  if  so.  One  has  to  think  of 
the  practical  side  of  things.” 

“I  know,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “One  does.  It’s  very  inter- 
esting.” 

“It  must  be  interesting  to  you,  dear,  because  you 
write  these  crime  stories.  So  I expect  really  you  would 

®3 


ELEPHANTS  GAN  REMEMBER 

have  better  ideas.  You’d  know  more  what’s  likely  to 

happen.”  , „ . , 

“I  don’t  know  what’s  likely  to  happen,  said  Mrs. 
Oliver,  “because,  you  see,  in  all  the  crimes  that  1 write, 
I’ve  invented  the  crimes.  I mean,  what  1 want  to  hap- 
pen, happens  in  my  stories.  It’s  not  something  that  actu- 
ally has  happened  or  that  could  happen.  So  l in  leally 
the  worst  person  to  talk  about  it.  1 ni  intcicstcci  to  know 
what  you  think  because  you  know  people  very  well, 
Julia,  and  you  knew  them  well.  And  I think  she  might 
have’said  something  to  you  one  day— or  he  might.” 

“Yes.  Yes,  now  wait  a minute  when  you  say  that, 
that  seems  to  bring  something  back  to  me. 

Mrs.  Carstairs  leaned  back  in  her  chair,  shook  her 
head  doubtfully,  half  closed  her  eyes  and  went  into  a 
jond  of  coma.  Mrs.  Oliver  remained  silent,  with  a look 
on  her  face  which  women  are  apt  to  wear  when  they 
are  waiting  for  the  first  signs  of  a kettle  coming  to  the 
boil. 

“She  did  say  something  once,  I remember,  and  I 
wonder  what  she  meant  by  it,”  said  Mrs.  Carstairs. 
“Something  about  starting  a new  life--in  connection,  I 
think,  with  St.  Teresa.  St.  Teresa  of  Avila.” 

Mrs.  Oliver  looked-slightly  startled. 

“But  how  did  St.  Teresa  of  Avila  come  into  if?” 

“Well,  I don’t  know  really.  I think  she  must  have 
been  reading  a Life  of  her.  Anyway,  she  said  that  it 
was  wonderful  how  women  get  a .sort  of  second  wind. 
That’s  not  quite  the  term  she  used,  but  something  like 
that.  You  know,  when  they  are  forty  or  fifty  or  that 
sort  of  agb  and  they  suddenly  want  to  begin  a new  life. 
Teresa  of  Avila  did.  She  hadn’t  done  iinytinng  spccitd 
up  till  then  except  being  a nun.  then  she  went  out  and 
reformed  all  the  convents,  didn’t  she,  and  Hung  her 


94 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


weight  about  and  became  a great  saint.” 

“Yes,  but  that  doesn’t  seem  quite  the  same  thing.” 

“No,  it  doesn’t,”  said  Mrs.  Carstairs.  “But  women  do 
talk  in  a very  silly  way,  you  knoW;  when  they  are  refer- 
ring to  love  affairs  when  they  get  on  in  life.  About  how 
it’s  never  too  late.” 


7. 

BACK  TO  THE  NURSERY 


Mrs.  OKver  looked  rather  doubtfully  at  the  three  steps 
and  the  front  door  of  a small,  rather  dilapidalcil  kiokiiig 
cottage  in  the  side  street.  Below  the  windows  some  bulbs 
were  growing,  mainly  tulips. 

Mrs.  Oliver  paused,  opened  the  little  adtlrcss  book  in 
her  hand,  verified  that  she  was  in  the  place  she  thought 
she  was,  and  rapped  gently  witii  the  knocker  after 
having  tried  to  press  a bell-push  of  p<issihlc  electrical 
significance  but  which  did  not  seem  to  yield  any  satis- 
factory bell  ringing  inside,  or  anything  of  that  kind.  Pres- 
'ntly,  not  getting  any  response,  she  knocked  again. 
Tiis  time  there  were  sound.s  from  irtsitle.  A .shufiling 
3und  of  feet,  some  asthmatic  breathing  and  liands  ap- 
arently  trying  to  manage  the  opening  of  the  door. 

96 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

With  this  noise  there  came  a few  vague  echoes  in  the 
letter  box. 

“Oh,  drat  it.  Drat  it.  Stuck  again,  you  brute,  you.” 

Finally,  success  met  these  inward  industries,  and  the 
door,  making  a creaky  and  rather  doubtful  noise,  was 
slowly  pulled  open.  A very  old  woman,  with  a wrinkled 
face,  humped  shoulders  and  a general  arthritic  appear- 
ance, looked  at  her.  Visitor.  Her  face  was  unwelcom- 
ing. It  held  no  sign  of  fear,  merely  of  distaste  for  those 
who  came  and  knocked  at  the  home  of  an  Englishwom- 
an’s castle.  She  might  have  been  seventy  or  eighty,  but 
she  was  still  a valiant  defender  of  her  home. 

“I  dunno  what  you’ve  come  about  and  I — ” she 
stopped.  “Why,”  slie  said,  “it’s  Miss  Ariadne.  Well,  1 
never  now!  It’s  Miss  Ariadne,” 

“I  think  you’re  wonderful  to  know  me,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver.  “How  are  you,  Mrs.  Matcham?” 

“Miss  Ariadne!  Just  think  of  that  now.” 

It  was,  Mrs.  Ariadne  Oliver  thought,  a long  time  ago 
since  she  had  been  addressed  as  Miss  Ariadne,  but  the 
i intonation  of  the  voice,  cracked  with  age  though  it  wds, 
rang  a familiar  note. 

“Come  in,  m’tlear,”  said  the  old  dame;  “come  in 
;now.  You’re  lookin’  well,  you  are.  I dunno  how  many 
years  it  is  since  I’ve  seen  you.  Fifteen  at  least.” 

It  was  a gocxl  deal  more  than  fifteen,  but  Mrs.  Oli- 
ver made  no  corrections.  She  came  in.  Mrs.  Matcham 
was  shaking  hands,  her  hands  were  rather  unwilling  to 
obey  their  owner’s  orders.  She  managed  to  shut  the  door 
and,  shuffling  her  feet  and  limping,  entered  a small 
room  which  was  obviously  one  that  was  kept  for  the  re- 
ception of  any  likely  or  unlikely  visitors  whom  Mrs. 
Matcham  was  prepared  to  admit  to  her  home.  There 
were  large  numbers  of  photographs — some  of  babies, 

97 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

some  of  adults.  Some  in  nice  leather  frames  which 
were  slowly  drooping  but  had  not  quite  fallen  to  pieces 
yet  One  in  a silver  frame  by  now  rather  tarnished, 
representing  a young  woman  in  presentation  court  dress 
with  feathers  rising  up  on  her  head.  'I'wo  naval  officers, 
two  military  gentlemen,  some  photographs  of  naked 
babies  sprawling  on  rugs.  There  was  a sofa  and  two 
chairs.  As  bidden,  Mrs.  Oliver  sat  in  a chair.  Mrs.  Mat 
Cham  pressed  hereelf  down  on  the  sofa  and  pulled  a 
cushion  into  the  hoUow  of  her  back  with  some  dilliculty. 

“Well,  my  dear,  fancy  seeing  you.  And  youTc  sti 
writing  your  pretty  stories,  are  you?” 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  a.ssenting  to  this  though 
with  a kght  doubt  as  to  how  far  detective  .stories  and 
stories  of  crime  and  general  criminal  behavior  could 
be  called  pretty  stories.  But  that,  she  thought,  was  very 
much  a habit  of  Mrs.  Matcham  s. 

“I’m  all  alone  now,”  said  Mrs.  Matcham.  “You  re- 
member Gracie,  my  sister?  She  died  last  .lutinnn,  she 
did.  Cancer  it  was.  They  operated,  but  it  was  too  late.” 

“Oh,  dear.  I’m  so  sorry,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

Conversation  proceeded  for  the  next  ten  minutes  on 
the  subject  of  the  demise,  one  by  one,  of  Mrs.  Mat- 
Cham’s  last  remaining  relatives. 

“And  you’re  all  right,  are  you?  l>oiug  till  right?  Got  a 
husband  now?  Oh,  now,  I remember,  he’s  dead  years 
ago,  isn’t  he?  And  what  brings  you  here  to  I, idle  Saltern 
Minor?” 

“I  just  happened  to  be  in  the  neighbtirluHHl,”  said 
Mrs.  Oliver,  “and  as  I’ve  got  your  address  in  my  little 
address  bewk  with  me,  I thought  !\i  just  drop  in  and- 
well,  sec  how  you  were  and  everything.” 

“Ah!  And  talk  about  old  times,  |>t?rhaps.  Always 
nice  when  you  can  do  that,  isn’t  It?” 

“Yes,  indeed,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  feeling  some  relief 

98 


ELEPHAHTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


that  this  particular  line  had  been  indicated  to  her  since 
it  was  more  or  less  what  she  had  come  for.  “What  a lot 
of  photographs  you’ve  got,”  she  said. 

“Ah,  I have,  an’  that.  D’you  know,  when  I was  in 
that  home — silly  name  it  had.  Sunset  House  of  Happi- 
ness for  the  Aged,  something  like  that  it  was  called,  a 
year  and  a quarter  I lived  there  till  I couldn’t  stand  it 
no  more,  a nasty  lot  they  were,  saying  you  couldn’t 
have  any  of  your  own  things  with  you.  You  know,  every- 
thing had  to  belong  to  the  home.  I don’t  say  as  it  wasn’t 
comfortable,  but  you  know,  I like  me  own  things  around 
me.  My  photos  and  my  furniture.  And  then  there  was 
ever  so  nice  a lady,  came  from  a Council,  she  did,  some 
society  or  other,  and  she  told  me  there  was  another 
place  where  they  had  homes  of  their  own  or  something 
and  you  could  take  what  you  liked  with  you.  And  there’s 
ever  such  a nice  helper  as.  comes  in  every  day  to  see  if 
you’re  all  right.  Ah,  very  comfortable  I am  here.  Very 
comfortable  indeed.  I’ve  got  all  my  own  things.” 

“Something  from  everywhere,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver, 
looking  round. 

“Yes,  that  table — the  brass  one — that’s  Captain  Wil- 
son, he  sent  me  that  from  Singapore  or  something  like 
that.  And  that  Benares  brass,  too.  That’s  nice,  isn’t  it? 
That’s  a funny  thing  on  the  ash  tray.  That’s  Egyptian, 
that  is.  It’s  a scarabee,  or  some’  name  like  that  You 
know.  Sounds  like  some  kind  of  scratching  disease,  but 
it  isn’t.  No,  it’s  a sort  of  beetle  and  it’s  made  out  of 
some  stone.  They  call  it  a precious  stone.  Bright  blue. 
A lazy — a lavis — a lazy  lapin  or  something  like  that.” 

“Lapis  lazuli,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“That’s  right.  That’s  what  it  is.  Very  nice,  that  is. 
That  wiis  ray  archeological  boy  what  went  digging.  He 
sent  me  that.” 

“All  your  lovely  past,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

99 


elephants  can  remember 

“Yes  all  iny  boys  and  gitls.  Some  of  them  as  babies, 
some  of  them  I had  from  the  month,  and  the  older 
ones.  Some  of  them  when  I went  to  India  vind  that  other 
time'  when  I was  in  Siam.  Yes.  That’s  Miss  Moya  hi 
her  court  dress.  Ah,  she  was  a pretty  thing.  Divorced 
two  husbands,  she  has.  Yes.  Trouble  with  his  lordship, 
the  first  one,  and  then  she  married  one  ol  those  pop  sing- 
ers and  of  course  that  couldn’t  take  very  well.  And  then 
she  married  someone  in  California.  They’ve  got  a yacht 
and  go  about  places,  I think.  Died  two  or  three  years 
ago  and  only  sixty-two.  Pity  dying  so  young,  you  know.” 

“You’ve  been  to  a lot  of  dilferent  parts  of  the  world 
yourself,  haven’t  you?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “India,  Hong 
Kong,  then  Egypt,  and  South  Amcricti,  wasn’t  it?” 

“Ah,  yes,  I’ve  been  about  a good  deal . 

“I  remember,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “when  1 was  in  In- 
dia, you  were  wth  a service  family  tlien,  weren’t  you? 
A General  somebody.  Was  it-  miw  wait  u minute,  I 
can’t  remember  the  name— “it  wusn  t Cjciiejal  and  Lady 
Ravenscroft,  was  it?” 

“No,  no,  you’ve  got  the  name  wrong.  You’re  thinking 
of  when  I was  with  the  Barnabys.  Thai’s  right.  You 
came  to  stay  with  them.  Remember?  You  were  doing  a 
tour,  you  were,  and  you  came  and  stayed  with  the 
Barnabys.  You  were  an  old  friend  of  hers.  He  was  a 
judge.” 

“Ah,  yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “It’s  diflicult  a bit.  One 
gets  names  mixed  up." 

“Two  nice  children  they  had,"  said  Mrs.  Matcham. 
“Of  course  they  went  to  school  in  Ihigland.  'I'lic  boy 
went  to  Harrow  and  the  girl  went  to  Rocilean,  I think 
it  was,  and  so  I moved  on  to  another  family  after  that 
Ah,  things  have  changed  nowadays.  Not  so  many  ayahs, 
even,  as  there  used  to  be.  Mind  you,  the  ayahs  used  tij 

100 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

be  a bit  of  a trouble  now  and  then.  I got  on  with  our 
one  very  well  when  I was  witli  the  Bamabys,  I mean. 
Who  was  it  you  spoke  of?  The  Ravenscrofts?  Well,  I 
remember  them.  Yes — I forget  the  name  of  the  place 
where  they  lived  now.  Not  far  from  us.  The  families 
were  acquainted,  you  know.  Oh,  yes,  it’s  a long  time 
ago,  but  I remember  it  all.  I was  still  out  there  with  the 
Bamabys,  you  know.  I stayed  on  when  the  children 
went  to  .school  to  look  after  Mrs.  Barnaby.  Look  after 
her  things,  you  know,  and  mend  them  and  all  that.  Oh, 
yes,  I was  there  when  that  awful  thing  happened.  I don’t 
mean  the  Bamabys.  I mean  to  the  Ravenscrofts.  Yes,  I 
shall  never  forget  that.  Hearing  about  it,  I mean.  Nat- 
urally I wasn’t  mixed  up  in  it  myself,  but  it  was  a ter- 
rible thing  to  happen,  wasn’t  it?” 

“I  should  think  it  must  have  been,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“It  was  aller  you’d  gone  back  to  England,  a good 
long  time  after  that,  I think.  A nice  couple  they  were. 
'Very  nice  couple  and  it  was  a shock  to  them.” 

“I  don’t  really  remember  now,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“I  know.  One  forgets  things.  I don’t  myself.  But  they 
said  she’d  always  been  queer,  you  know.  Ever  since 
the  time  she  was  a child.  Some  early  story  there  was. 
She  took  a baby  out  of  the  pram  and  threw  it  in  the 
river.  Jealousy,  they  said.  Other  people  said  she  wanted 
the  baby  to  go  to  heaven  and  not  wait.” 

“Is  it — i.s  it  Lady  Ravenscroft,  you  mean?” 

“No,  of  course  I don’t.  Ah,  you  don’t  remember  as 
well  as  1 do.  It  was  the  sister.” 

“Her  sister?” 

“I’m  not  .sure  iww  whether  it  was  her  sister  or  his  sis- 
ter. They  said  .she’d  been  in  a kind  of  mental  place  for 
a long  time,  you  know.  Ever  since  she  was  about  eleven 
or  twelve  y^ra  old.  They  kept  her  ,,]tbere.  and  then 

101 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

iJiev  said  she  was  aU  right  again  and  she  came  out 
And  she  married  someone  in  the  Army.  And  then  there 
was  trouble.  And  the  next  thing  they  heard,  I believe, 
was  that  she’d  been  put  back  again  in  one  of  them  loony- 
bin places.  They  treat  you  very  well,  you  know.  They 
have  a suite,  nice  rooms  and  ail  that.  And  they  used  to 
go  and  see  her,  I believe.  I mean  the  General  did  or  his 
wife.  The  children  were  brought  up  by  someone  else,  I 
think,  because  they  were  afraid-like,  llowever,  they 
said  she  was  all  right  in  the  end.  So  she  came  back  to 
live  with  her  husband,  and  then  he  died  or  something, 
Blood  pressure  I think  it  was,  or  heart.  Anyway,  she 
was  very  upset  and  she  came  out  to  stay  with  her  broth- 
er or  her  sister— -whichever  it  was she  seemed  quite 

happy  there  and  everything,  and  ever  so  fimd  of  chil- 
dren,  she  was.  It  wasn’t  the  little  hoy,  I think.  He  was 
at  school.  It  was  the  little  girl,  and  another  little  girl 
who’d  come  to  play  with  her  that  afternoon.  Ah,  well,  I 
can’t  remember  the  details  now.  It’s  .so  long  ago.  There 
was  a lot  of  talk  about  it.  There  wiis  some  as  .said,  you 
know,  as  it  wasn’t  her  at  a!!.  They  thought  it  was  the 
ayah  that  had  done  it,  but  the  aytih  loved  them  and  she 
was  very,  very  upset.  She  wanted  to  take  them  away 
from  the  house.  She  said  they  wcrcu  t safe  there,  and 
all  sorts  of  things  like  that.  But  of  course  the  others 
didn’t  believe  in  it  and  then  this  came  abmit  and  I gatti- 
er  they  think  it  must  have  been  whatever  iter  name 
was— I can’t  remember  it  now.  Anyway,  there  it  wa.s.” 

“And  what  happened  to  this  sister,  either  <if  General 
or  Lady  Ravenscroft?” 

“Well,  I think,  you  know,  as  she  was  taken  away  by 
a dwtor  and  put  in  some  place  am!  went  hack  to  En? 
gland,  I believe,  in  the  end.  I dunno  if  siic  went  tn  the 
same  place  as  before,  but  she  was  well  looked  after 
somewhere.  There  was  plenty  of  numey,  I liiink,  you 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

know.  Plenty  of  money  in  the  husband’s  family.  Mhybe 
she  got  all  right  again.  But,  well,  I haven’t  thought  of  it 
for  years.  Not  till  you  came  here  asking  me  stories 
about  General  and  Lady  Ravenscroft.  I wonder  where 
they  are  now.  They  must  have  retired  before  now, 
long  ago.” 

“Well,  it  was  rather  sad,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Perhaps 
you  read  about  it  in  the  papers.” 

“Read  what?” 

“Well,  they  bought  a house  in  England  and  then—” 

“Ah,  now,  it’s  coming  back  to  me.  I remember  read- 
ing something  about  that  in  the  paper.  Yes,  and  think- 
ing then  that  I knew  the  name  Ravenscroft,  but  I 
couldn’t  quite  remember  when  and  how.  They  fell  over 
a cliff,  didn’t  they?  Something  of  that  kind.” 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “something  of  that  kind.” 

“Now  look  here,  dearie,  it’s  so  nice  to  see  you,  it  is. 
You  must  let  me  give  you  a cup  of  tea.” 

“Really,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “I  don’t  need  any  tea. 
Really,  1 don’t  want  it." 

“Of  course  you  want  some  tea.  If  you  don’t  mind 
now,  come  into  tiic  kitchen,  will  you?  I mean,  I spend 
most  of  my  time  there  now.  It’s  easier  to  get  about 
there.  But  1 take  visitors  always  into  this  room  because 
I’m  proud  of  my  things,  you  know.  Proud  of  my  things 
and  proud  of  all  the  children  and  the  others.*” 

“1  think,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “that  people  like  you 
must  have  had  a wonderful  life  with  all  the  children 
you’ve  hx)kcd  after.” 

“Yes.  1 remember  when  you  were  a little  girl,  you 
liked  to  li.sten  to  the  stories  I told  you.  There  was  one 
about  a tiger,  I remember,  and  one  about  monkeys — - 
monkeys  in  a tree.” 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  "I  remember  those.  It  was  a 
very  long  time  ago.” 


103 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Her  mind  swept  back  to  herself,  a child  of  six  ot 
seven,  walking  in  button  boots  that  were  rather  too  tight 
on  a road  in  England,  and  listening  to  a story  of  India 
and  Egypt  from  an  attendant  Nanny.  And  this  was 
Nanny.  Mrs.  Matcham  was  Nanny.  She  looked  round 
the  room  as  she  followed  her  hostess  out.  At  the  pictures 
of  girls,  of.  schoolboys,  of  children  and  various  middle- 
aged  people,  all  mainly  photographed  iii  their  best 
clothes  and  sent  in  nice  frames  or  other  things  because 
they  hadn’t  forgotten  Nanny.  Because  of  them,  prob- 
ably, Nanny  was  having  a reasonably  comfortable  old 
age  with  money  supplied.  Mrs.  Oliver  felt  a sudden  de- 
sire to  burst  out  crying.  This  was  so  unlike  her  that  she  - 
was  able  to  stop  herself  by  an  clfort  of  will.  She  fol- 
lowed  Mrs.  Matcham  to  the  kitchen.  Thei-c  she  pro- 
duced  the  offering  she  had  brought. 

“Well,  I never!  A tin  of  Tophole  Tliathams  tea.  Al- 
ways my  favorite.  Fancy  you  remenihering.  1 can  hardly 
ever  get  it  nowadays.  And  that’s  niy  favrn'ite  tea  liiscuits, 
Well,  you  are  a one  for  never  forgetting.  What  was  it 
they  used  to  call  you — those  two  little  hoys  wlro  ctune 
to  play — one  would  call  you  Lady  liiephant  and  tie 
other  one  called  you  Lady  -Swan.  The  one  wlio  called 
you  Lady  Elephant  used  to  sit  tm  your  hack  and  you 
went  about  the  floor  on  all  fours  anil  pretended  to  have 
a trank  you  picked  things  up  with." 

“You  don’t  forget  many  things,  do  yrai,  Nanny?” 
said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Ah,”  said  Mrs.  Matcham.  "Elephants  don’t  forget 
That’s  the  old  saying.” 


104 


8. 

MRS.  OLIVER  AT  WORK 


Mrs.  Oliver  entered  the  premises  of  Williams  & Barnet, 
a well-appointed  chemist’s  shop  also  dealing  with  vari- 
ous cosmetics.  She  paused  by  a kind  of  dumbwaiter  con- 
taining various  types  of  corn  remedies,  hesitated  by  a 
mountain  of  rubber  sponges,  wandered  vaguely  toward 
the  prescription  desk  and  then  came  down  past  the 
well-displayed  aids  to  beauty  as  imagined  by  Elizabeth 
Arden,  Helena  Rubinstein,  Max  Factor  and  other  bene- 
fit providers  for  women’s  lives. 

She  stopped  finally  near  a rather  plump  girl  of  thirty- 
five  or  so,  and  inquired  for  certain  lipsticks,  then  uttered 
a short  cry  of  surprise. 

“Why,  Marlene-— it  is  Marleiw  isn’t  it?” 

“Well,  I never.  It’s  Mrs.  Oliver.  I am  pleased  to  see 
you.  It’s  wonderful,  isn’t  it?  AU  the  girls  will  be  very 

105 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


excited  when  I teU  them  that  you’ve  been  in  to  buy 

things  here”  . . 

“No  need  to  tell  them,  said  Mis.  Olivti  . 

“Oh,  now  Fm  sure  they’ll  be  bringing  out  their  auto- 
graph  books!” 

“Fd  rather  they  didn’t,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “And  how 
are  you,  Marlene?” 

“Oh,  getting  along,  getting  along  ” said  Mtirlcnc. 

“I  didn’t  know  whether  you’d  be  working  here  still.” 
“Well,  it’s  as  good  as  any  other  plticc,  I think,  and 
they  treat  you  very  well  here,  you  know.  1 httcl  a rise  in 
salary  last  year  and  Fm  more  or  less  in  charge  of  this 
cosmetic  counter  now,” 

“And  your  mother?  Is  she  well?” 

“Oh  yes.  Mum  will  be  plcascti  to  hear  Fve  met  you.” 
“Is  she  still  living  in  her  same  house  down  the— the 


road  past  the  hospital?” 

“Oh,  yes,  we’re  still  there.  Dad’.s  not  been  so  well. 
He’s  been  in  hospital  for  a while,  but  Mum  keeps  along 
very  well  indeed.  Oh,  .she  will  be  pieasetl  to  hear  I’ve 
seen  you.  Are  you  staying  here  by  any  cliancc?” 

“Not  really,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Fm  just  pa.ssing 
through,  as  a matter  of  fact.  I’ve  been  to  sec  an  old 
friend  and  I wonder  now—”  she  looked  at  her  wrist 
watch.  “Would  your  mother  be  at  home  now,  Marlene? 
I could  just  call  in  and  see  her.  Have  a few  words  be- 
fore I have  to  get  on.” 

“Oh,  do  do  that,”  .said  Marlene.  "She’d  l>e  ever  so 
pleased.  Fm  sorry  I can’t  leave  here  tind  conic  with 
you,  but  1 don’t  think— well,  it  wouldn’t  he  vieweii  very 
well.  You  know,  1 can't  get  off  for  another  hour  and 
a half.” 

“Oh,  well,  .some  other  time.”  said  Mr.s,  Oliver.  "Any- 
way, I can’t  quite  remember — was  it  Numl>t:r  Seven-’ 
teen  or  has  it  got  a name?" 


106 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“It’s  called  Laurel  Cottage.” 

“Oh,  yes,  of  course.  How  stupid  of  me.  Well,  nice  to 
have  seen  you.” 

She  hurried  out  plus  one  unwanted  lipstick  in  her 
bag,  and  drove  her  car  down  the  main  street  of  Chipping 
Bartrain  and  turned,  after  passing  a garage  and  a hos- 
pital building,  down  a rather  narrow  road  which  had 
quite  pleasant  small  houses  built  on  either  side  of  it. 

She  left  the  car  outside  Laurel  Cottage  and  went  in. 
A thin,  energetic  woman  with  gray  hair,  of  about  fifty 
years  of  age,  opened  the  door  and  displayed  instant 
signs  of  recognition. 

“Why,  so  it’s  you,  Mrs.  Oliver.  Ah,  well,  now.  Not 
seen  you  for  years  and  years,  I haven’t.” 

“Oh,  it’s  a very  long  time.” 

“Well,  come  in  then;  come  in.  Can  I make  you  a nice 
cup  of  tea?” 

“I’m  afraid  not,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “because  I’ve  had 
tea  already  with  a friend,  and  I’ve  got  to  get  back  to 
London.  As  it  happened,  I went  into  the  chemist  for 
something  I wanted  and  I saw  Marlene  there.” 

“Yes,  she’s  got  a very  good  job  there.  They  think  a 
lot  of  her  in  that  place.  They  say  she’s  got  a lot  of  en- 
terprise.” 

“Well,  that’s  very  nice.  And  how  are  you,  Mrs. 
Buckle?  You  look  very  well.  Hardly  older  than  when  I 
saw  you  last.” 

“Oh,  I wouldn’t  like  to  say  that.  Gray  hairs,  and  I’ve 
lost  a lot  of  weight.” 

“This  seems  to  be  a day  when  I meet  a lot  of  friends 
I knew  formerly,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  going  into  the  house 
and  being  led  into  a small,  rather  overclustered  sitting 
room.  “1  don’t  know  if  you  remember  Mrs.  Carstairs — 
Mrs.  Julia  Carstairs.” 


107 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Oh,  of  course  I do.  Yes,  rather.  She  must  be  getting 

“Oh,  yes,  she  is,  really.  But  we  talked  over  a few  old 

days,  you  know.  In  fact,  we  went  .is  ftu  us  tulking  about 
that ’tragedy  that  occurred.  I was  in  America  at  the 
time  so  I didn’t  know  much  about  it.  People  called 
Ravenscroft.” 

“Oh,  I remember  that  well.” 

“You  worked  for  them,  didn’t  you,  at  one  time,  Mrs, 

Buckle?” 

“Yes.  I used  to  go  in  three  mornings  a week.  Very 
nice  people  they  were.  You  know,  really  miliuuy  lady 
and  gentleman,  as  you  might  say.  The  old  school.” 

“It  was  a very  tragic  thing  to  happen.” 

“Yes,  it  was,  indeed.”  , 

“Were  you  still  working  for  them  at  that  time?” 

“No.  As  a matter  of  fact,  I’d  given  up  going  there.  I 
had  my  old  Aunt  Emma  come  to  live  with  me  and  she 
was  rather  blind  and  not  very  well,  iuid  I couldn’t  real- 
ly spare  the  time  any  more  to  go  out  tioing  things  for 
people.  But  I’d  been  with  them  up  to  alwut  a month 
or  two  before  that,” 

“It  seemed  such  a terrible  thing  to  liappcn,”  said 
Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  understand  that  they  thought  it  was  a 
suicide  pact.” 

"I  don’t  believe  that,”  said  Mrs.  Buckle.  *i’m  sure 
they’d  never  have  committed  suicide  ttigether.  Not 
people  that  age.  And  living  so  pleasantly  together  as 
they  did.  Of  course,  they  hadn’t  lived  there  very  long.” 

“No,  I suppose  they  hadn’t,"  said  Mr.s.  Oliver.  “ I’hey 
lived  somewhere  near  Bournemouth,  didn't  they,  when 
they  first  came  to  England?" 

“Yes,  but  they  found  it  was  a bit  t(K>  far  for  getting  to 
London  from  there,  and  so  that’s  why  they  came  to 

108 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Caiippping  Bartram.  Very  nice  house  it  was,  and  a nice 
garden.” 

“Were  they  both  in  good  health  when  you  were  work- 
ing for  them  last?” 

“Well,  they  felt  their  age  a bit  as  most  people  do.  The 
General,  he’d  had  some  kind  of  heart  trouble  or  a slight 
stroke.  Something  of  that  kind,  you  know.  They’d  take 
pills,  you  know,  and  lie  up  a bit  from  time  to  time.” 

“And  Mrs.  Ravcnscroft?” 

“Well,  I think  she  missed  the  life  she’d  had  abroad, 
you  know.  They  didn’t  know  so  very  many  people  there, 
although  they  got  to  know  a good  many  families,  of 
course,  being  the  sort  of  class  they  were.  But  I suppose 
it  wasn’t  like  India  or  those  places.  You  know,  where 
you  have  a lot  of  servants.  I suppose  gay  parties  and  that 
sort  of  thing.” 

“You  think  she  missed  her  gay  parties?” 

“Well,  I don’t  know  that  exactly.” 

“Somebody  told  me  she’d  taken  to  wearing  a wig.”  | 

“Oh,  she’d  got  several  wigs,”  said  Mrs.  Buckle,  smil* 
ing  slightly.  “Very  smart  ones  and  very  expensive.  You 
know,  from  time  to  time  she’d  send  one  back  to  the 
place  she’d  got  it  from  in  London,  and  they’d  redress  it 
for  her  again  and  send  it.  There  were  all  kinds.  You 
know,  there  was  one  with  auburn  hair,  and  one  with  lit- 
tle gray  curls  all  over  her  head.  Really,  she  looked  very 
nice  in  that  one.  And  two — well,  not  so  attractive  really 
but  useful  for — ^you  know — windy  days  when  you  want- 
ed something  to  put  on  when  it  might  be  raining. 
Thought  a lot  about  her  appearmice,  you  know,  and 
spent  a lot  of  her  money  on  clothes.” 

“What  do  you  think  was  the  cause  of  the  tragedy?” 
said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “You  see,  not  being  anywhere  near 
here  and  not  seeing  any  of  my  friends  at  toat  time  be- 


109 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

cause  I was  in  America,  I missed  hearing  anything 
about  it  and,  well,  one  doesn’t  like  to  ask  ciucstions  or 
write  letters  about  things  of  that  kind.  I suppose  there 
must  have  been  some  cause.  1 mean,  it  w<is  General 
Ravenscroft’s  own  revolver  that  was  used,  I undet- 

yes,  he  had  two  of  those  in  the  house  because 
he  said  that  no  house  was  safe  without.  Perhaps  he  was 
right  there,  you  know.  Not  that  they’d  had  any  trouble 
beforehand  as  far  hs  I know.  One  afternoon  a rather 
nasty  sort  of  fellow  came  along  to  the  door.  Didn’t  like 
the  look  of  him,  I didn’t.  Wanted  to  sec  the  General. 
Said  he’d  been  in  the  General’s  regiment  when  he  was 
a young  fellow.  Xhe  Gencial  asked  him  a lew  ciueS" 
tions  and  I think  thought  as  how  he  didn’t—well, 
thought  he  wasn’t  very  reliable.  So  he  sent  him  olT.” 

“You  think  then  that  it  was  someone  outside  that  did 

it?” 

“Well,  I think  it  must  have  been,  because  1 can’t  see 
any  other  thing.  Mind  you,  1 didn’t  like  the  man  who 
came  and  did  the  gardening  for  them  very  much.  He 
•hadn’t  got  a very  good  reputation  and  1 gather  he’d  had 
a few  jail  sentences  earlier  in  his  life.  But  of  course  the 
General  took  up  his  references  and  he  wanted  to  give 
him  a chance.” 

“So  you  think  the  gardener  might  have  killed  them?" 

“Well,  I— I alway.s  thought  that.  But  then  I’m  prob- 
ably wrong.  But  it  doesn’t  seem  to  me--  I mean,  the 
people  who  stud  there  was  some  scsuHlalous  story  or 
something  about  either  her  or  him  and  that  either  he’d 
shot  her  or  she’d  shot  him,  that’s  all  nonsense,  I’d  .say. 
No,  it  was  some  outsider.  One  of  these  people  that- 
well,  it’s  not  as  bad  as  it  is  nowadays  because  that,  you 
ttiust  remember,  was  before  people  begitn  getting  all  this 
violence  idea.  But  look  at  what  you  read  in  the  papers 


110 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

every  day  now.  Young  men,  practically  only  boys  still, 
taking  a lot  of  drugs  and  going  wild  and  rushing  about, 
shooting  a lot  of  people  for  nothing  at  all,  asking  a girl 
in  a pub  to  have  a drink  with  them  and  then  they  see 
her  home  and  next  day  her  body’s  found  in  a ditch. 
Stealing  children  out  of  prams  from  their  mothers,  tak- 
ing a girl  to  a dance  and  murdering  her  or  strangling 
her  on  the  way  back.  If  anything,  you  feel  as  anyone 
can  do  anything.  And  anyway,  there’s  that  nice  couple, 
the  General  and  hi.s  wife,  out  for  a nice  walk  in  the 
evening,  and  there  they  were,  both  shot  through  the 
head.” 

“Was  it  through  the  head?” 

“Well,  1 don’t  remember  exactly  now  and  of  course 
I.never  saw  anything  myself.  But  anyway,  just  went  for 
a walk  as  they  often  did.” 

. “And  they’d  not  been  on  bad  terms  with  each  other?” 

“Well,  they  had  words  now  and  again,  but  who 
doesn’t?” 

“No  boy  friend  or  girl  friend?” 

“Well,  if  you  can  use  that  term  of  people  of  that  age, 
oh,  I mean  there  was  a bit  of  talk  here  and  there,  but 
it  was  all  nonsense.  Nothing  to  it  at  all.  People  always 
want  to  say  something  of  that  kind.” 

“Perhaps  one  of  them  was — ^ill.” 

“Well,  Lady  Ravenscroft  had  been  up  to  London 
once  or  twice  consulting  a doctor  about  something  and 
I rather  think  she  was  going  into  hospital,  or  planning 
to  go  into  hospital  for  an  operation  of  some  kind,  though 
she  never  told  me  exactly  what  it  was.  But  I think  they 
managed  to  put  her  right — ^she  was  in  this  hospital  for 
a short  time.  No  operation,  1 think.  And  when  she  came 
back,  she  lt)oked  very  much  younger.  Altogether,  she’d 
had  a lot  of  face  treatment  and  you  know,  she  looked 
so  pretty  in  these  wigs  with  curls  on  them.  Rather  as 

in 


elephants  can  remember 


though  she’d  got  a new  lease  of  life.” 

“And  General  Ravenscroft.' 

‘"He  was  a very  nice  gentleman  and  I never  hoard  or 
knew  of  any  scandal  about  him  and  1 don’t  think  there 
w^  any.  People  say  things,  but  then  they  want  to  say 
something  when  there’s  been  a trngetly  ot  t,„y  kind.  „ 
seems  to  me  perhaps  as  he  might  have  had  :i  blow  on 
SLd  in  India  or  something  like  that.  I had  an  uncle 
or  a great-uncle,  you  know,  wlio  tell  oil  Iuk  horse  there 
once  Hit  it  on  a cannon  or  something  and  he  was  very 
queer  afterwards.  All  right  for  about  six  months  and 
then  they  had  to  put  him  into  an  asylum  because  he 
wanted  to  take  his  wife’s  life  tlic  whole  time.  He  said 
she  was  persecuting  him  and  following  him  and  that  she 
was  a spy  for  another  nation.  Ah.  there’s  no  saying  what 
things  happen  or  can  happen  in  iamilies. 

“Anyway,  you  don’t  think  there  was  any  truth  in 
some  of  the  stories  atnuit  them  that  I have  liappcncd  to 
hear  of,  bad  feeling  between  them  so  that  one  of  them 
shot  the  other  and  then  shot  liimself  or  herself  I ' 

“Oh,  no,  1 don’t.” 

“Were  her  children  at  home  at  the  time?" 

“No.  Miss— cr— oh,  what  was  her  name  mm,  Rosie? 
No.  Penelope?” 

“Celia,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  **Khc's  my  i-.oddaughtcr.” 

“Oh,  of  course  she  is.  Yes.  I know  that  now.  I re- 
member you  coming  and  taking  her  out  imee.  She  was 
a high-spirited  girl,  rather  bad-tempcreil  in  some  ways, 
but  she  was  very  fond  of  her  father  and  mother,  I 
think.  No,  she  was  away  at  a schi»ol  in  .Swif;rerl:nKi  what 
it  hapixmed,  I’m  glad  to  say.  heeaitsc  it  would  have 
been  a terrible  .shock  to  her  if  she’d  been  m home  and 


ELEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

ried  about  him,  I think.  He  looked  as  though  he  dis- 
liked his  father.” 

“Oh,  there’s  nothing  in  that.  Boys  go  through  that 
stage,  I think.  Was  he  very  devoted  to  his  mother?” 

“Well,  she  fussed  over  him  a bit  too  much,  I think, 
which  he  found  tiresome.  You  know,  they  don’t  like  a 
mother  fussing  over  them,  telling  them  to  wear  thicker 
vests  or  put  an  extra  pullover  on.  His  father,  he  didn’t 
like  the  way  he  wore  his  hair.  It  was — well,  they  weren’t 
wearing  hair  like  the  way  they  are  nowadays,  but  they 
were  beginning  to,  if  you  know  what  I mean.” 

“But  the  boy  wasn’t  at  home  at  the  time  of  the  trag- 
edy?” 

“No.” 

“I  suppose  it  was  a shock  to  him?” 

“Well,  it  must  have  been.  Of  course,  I wasn’t  going  to 
die  house  any  more  at  that  time,  so  I didn’t  hear  so 
much.  If  you  ask  me,  1 didn’t  like  that  gardener.  What 
was  his  name  now— Fred,  I think.  Fred  Wizell.  Some 

name  like  that.  Seems  to  me  if  he’d  done  a bit  of well, 

a bit  of  cheating  or  something  like  that  and  the  General 
had  found  him  out  and  was  going  to  sack  him,  I wouldn’t 
put  it  past  him.” 

“To  shoot  the  husband  and  wife?” 

“Well,  Fd  have  thought  it  more  likely  he’d  just  have 
shot  the  General  If  he  shot  the  General  and  the  wife 
came  along,  then  he’d  have  had  to  shoot  her,  too.  You 
read  things  like  that  in  books.” 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  thoughtfully,  “one  does  read 
all  sorts  of  things  in  books.” 

“There  was  the  tutor.  I didn’t  like  him  much.” 

“What  tutor?” 

“Well,  there  was  a tutor  for  the  boy  earlier.  You 
know,  he  couldn’t  pass  an  exam  and  things  at  the  ear- 
lier school  he  was  at— prep  school  or  something.  So 

113 


ELEPHAHTS  REiEiBEl 

thev  liad  a tutor  for  him.  He  was  theie  foi  about  a year, 
I think  Lady  Ravenscroft  liked  him  very  much.  She 

was  musical,  you  know,  and  so  was  (his  tutor  Mr.  Ed- 
munds  I think  his  name  was.  Rather  a namby-pamby 
sort  of’ young  man,  I thought  myself,  and  it’s  my  opin- 
ion that  General  Ravenscroft  didn’t  care  for  Imn 

much.’’ 

. ‘‘But  Mrs.  Ravenscroft  did. 

“Oh  they  had  a lot  in  common,  I tliink.  And  I thirilc 

she  wa^  the  one  really  that  chose  him  ratlu-r  immc  than 
the  General.  Mind  you,  he  liati  very  incc  manners 
and  spoke  to  everyone  nicely  and  all  that  ” 

“And  did — what’s-his-name?” 

“Edward?  Oh,  yes,  he  liked  iiim  all  right,  1 think.  In 
fact,  he  was  quite  a bit  soft  on  him,  I think.  Almost  a bit 
of  hero  worship.  AAyway,  don’t  you  iudieve  any  stories 
you  hear  about  scandals  in  (he  family  or  her  having  an 
affair  with  anyone  or  Genctai  R,ivenseioit  with  that 
rather  pie-faced  girl  who  did  iiling  work  for  him  and  afl 
that  sort  of  thing.  No.  Whoever  that  wicked  murderer 
was  it’s  one  who  came  from  ouf.side.  'Fhe  police  never 
gQ^  0j^  to  anyone,  no  car  was  seen  ikvii  there  and  there 
was  nothing  to  it  and  they  never  got  any  further.  But  all 
the  same,  I think  one  ought  to  look  about  for  somebody 
perhaps  who’d  known  them  in  Malaya  or  abroad  or 
somewhere  else,  or  even  when  they  were  first  living  at 
Bournemouth.  One  never  knows." 

“What  did  your  husband  think  about  it?"  said  Mrs, 
Oliver.  “He  wouldn’t  have  known  as  much  about  them 
as  you  would,  of  course,  but  still  he  inigiit  have  heard 
a lot” 

“Oh,  he  heard  a lot  of  talk,  of  course.  In  the  Geoige 
and  Flag,  of  an  evening,  you  know,  Peoide  saying  aE 
sorts  of  things.  Said  as  she  drank  ami  that  ease.'!  d 
empty  bottles  had  been  taken  out  of  tlw  house.  Also* 


tia 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

lutely  untrue,  that  was,  I know  for  a fact  And  there 
was  a nephew  as  used  to  come  and  see  them  some- 
times. Got  into  trouble  with  the  police  in  some  way,  he 
did,  but  I don’t  think  there  was  anything  in  that.  The 
police  didn’t,  either.  Anyway,  it  wasn’t  at  that  time.” 

“There  was  no  one  else  really  living  in  the  house,  was 
there,  except  the  General  and  Lady  Ravenscroft?” 

“Well,  she  had  a sister  as  used  to  come  sometimes. 
Lady  Ravenscroft  did.  She  was  a half-sister,  I think. 
Something  like  that.  Looked  rather  like  Lady  Ravens- 
croft but  not  very  good-looking  and  a year  or  two  older, 
I should  say.  She  made  a bit  of  trouble  between  them,  I 
always  used  to  think,  when  she  came  for  a visit.  She 
was  one  of  those  who  likes  stirring  things  up,  if  you 
know  what  I mean.  Just  said  things  to  annoy  people.” 

“Was  Lady  Ravenscroft  fond  of  her?” 

“Well,  if  you  ask  me,  I don’t  think  she  was  really.  I 
think  the  sister  more  or  less  wished  herself  on  to  them 
sometimes  and  she  didn’t  like  not  to  have  her,  but  I 
think  she  found  it  pretty  trying  to  have  her  there.  The 
General  quite  liked  her  because  she  played  cards  well. 
Played  chess  and  things  with  him  and  he  enjoyed  that 
And  she  was  an  amusing  woman  in  a way.  Mrs.  Jerry- 
boy  or  something  like  that,  her  name  was.  She  was  a 
widow,  I think.  Used  to  borrow  money  from  them,  I 
think,  too.” 

“Did  you  like  her?” 

“Well,  if  you  don’t  mind  my  saying  so,  ma’am,  no,  I 
didn’t  like  her.  I disliked  her  very  much.  I thought  she 
was  one  of  those  troublemakers,  you  know.  But  she 
hadn’t  been  down  for  some  time  before  the  tragedy  hap- 
pened. I don’t  really  remember  very  much  what  she 
was  like.  She  had  a son  as  came  with  her  once  or  twice. 
Didn’t  like  him  very  much.  Shifty,  I thought” 

“Well,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  suppose  nobody  wUl  teal- 

%%5 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

ly  ever  know  the  truth.  Not  now.  Not  after  all  this  time. 
I saw  my  goddaughter  the  other  day.” 

“Did  you  now,  ma’am.  I’d  be  interested  to  hear  about 
Miss  Celia.  How  is  she?  All  right?” 

“Yes.  She  seems  quite  all  right.  1 think  slic’s  thinldng 
perhaps  of  getting  married.  At  any  rate  she’s  got  a— » 

“Got  a steady  boy  friend,  ha.s  she?”  s;iid  Mrs.  BucMe. 
“Ah,  well,  we’ve  all  got  that.  Not  that  we  all  marry  the 
first 'one  we  settle  on.  Just  as  well  if  ytni  don’t,  nine 
times  out  of  ten.” 

“You  don’t  know  a Mrs.  Burton-Co.x,  do  you?”  a.sked 
Mrs.  Oliver.” 

“Burton-Cox?  I seem  to  know  that  name.  No,  I 
don’t  think  so.  'Wasn’t  living  down  here  or  come  to  stay 
with  them  or  anything?  No,  not  that  1 rentetuber.  Yeti 
did  hear  something.  Some  old  friend  of  ( icimral  Ravens- 
croft,  I think,  which  he’d  known  in  India.  But  1 don’t 
know.”  She  shook  her  head. 

“Well,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “1  mustn’t  stay  gossiping 
with  you  any  longer.  It’s  been  so  nice  to  see  you  and 
Marlene.” 


116 


9. 

RESULTS  OF  ELEPHANTINE 
RESEARCH 


“A  telephone  call  for  you,”  said  Hercule  Poirot’s  man- 
servant George.  “From  Mrs.  Oliver.” 

“Ah,  yes,  George.  And  what  had  she  to  say?” 

“She  wondered  if  she  could  come  and  see  you  this 
evening,  sir,  after  dinner.” 

“That  would  be  admirable,”  said  Poirot.  “Admirable, 
I have  had  a tiring  day.  It  will  be  a stimulating  experi- 
ence to  sec  Mrs.  Oliver.  She  is  always  entertaining  as 
well  as  being  highly  unexpected  in  the  things  she  says. 
Did  she  mention  elephants,  by  the  way?” 

“Elephants,  sir?  No,  I do  not  think  so.” 

“Ah.  Then  it  would  seem  perhaps  that  the  elephants 
have  been  disappointing." 

George  looked  at  his  master  rather  doubtfully.  There 
117 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

were  times  when  he  did  not  quite  understand  the  rele- 

vance  of  Poirot’s  remarks. 

“Ring  her  back,”  said  Herculc  Poirot.  Tell  her  I 

shah  be  delighted  to  receive  her.” 

George  went  away  to  carry  out  tins  order,  and  re- 
turned  to  say  that  Mrs.  Oliver  would  be  there  about 
quarter  to  nine. 

“Coffee”  said  Poirot.  “Let  coflee  bo  prepared  and 
spme  petite  fours.  I rather  think  I ordered  some  in  lat^ 
ly  from  Fortnum  and  Mason.”^^ 

“A  liqueur  of  any  kind,  sir?” 

“No,  I think  not.  i myself  will  have  .some  Strop  de 

Cassis.” 

“Yes,  sir.” 

Mrs.  Oliver  arrived  exactly  on  time.  Poirot  greeted  her 
with  every  sign  of  pleasure. 

“And  how  arc  you,  chi‘re  tmdanie?” 

“Exhausted,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

She  sank  down  into  the  armchair  that  Poirot  inffl. 

cated. 

“Completely  exhausted.” 

“Ah.  Qui  va  d la  cM«‘e-~oh,  I cannot  remember  the 
saying.” 

“I  remember  it,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “1  learned  it  as  a 
child.  ‘Qui  va  d la  chasse  pmi  sa  plutv.'  " 

“That,  I am  sure,  is  not  applicable  to  the  chase  you 
have  been  conducting.  1 am  referring  to  the  pursuit  of 
elephants,  unless  that  was  merely  a tigHre  of  siweeh.” 

“Not  at  all,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  "I  have  been  pursuing 
elephants  madly.  Here,  there  and  everywhere,  m 
amount  of  petrol  I have  used,  tl»c  amount  of  trains  I 
have  taken,  the  amount  of  letters  I’ve  written,  the 
amount  of  telegrams  I've  sent— you  wuuklu’t  believe 
how  exhausting  it  aU  b.” 


118 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“Then  repose  yourself.  Have  some  coffee.” 

“Nice,  strong,  black  coffee — ^yes,  I will.  Just  what  I 
want.” 

’ “Did  you,  may  I ask,  get  any  results?” 

“Plenty  of  results,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “The  trouble  is, 
- 1 don’t  know  whether  any  of  them  are  any  use.” 

“You  learned  facts,  however?” 

“No.  Not  really.  I learned  things  that  people  told  me 
were  facts,  but  I strongly  doubt  myself  whether  any  of 
them  were  facts.” 

“They  were  hearsay?” 

“No.  They  wore  what  I said  they  would  be.  They 
were  memories.  Lots  of  people  who  had  memories.  The 
trouble  is,  when  you  remember  things,  you  don’t  always 
remember  them  right,  do  you?” 

“No.  But  they  arc  still  what  you  might  describe  per- 
haps as  results.  Is  not  that  so?” 

“And  what  have  you  done?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“You  are  always  so  stern,  madame,”  said  Poirot 
“You  demand  that  I run  about,  that  I also  do  tiling.” 

“Well,  have  you  run  about?” 

“I  have  not  run  about,  but  I have  had  a few  consulta- 
tions with  others  of  my  own  profession.” 

“It  sounds  far  more  peaceful  than  what  I have  been 
doing,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Oh,  this  coffee  is  nice.  It’s 
really  strong.  You  wouldn’t  believe  how  tired  I am. 
And  how  muddled.” 

“Come,  come.  Let  us  have  good  expectancy.  You 
have  got  things.  You  have  got  something,  I think.” 

“I’ve  got  a lot  of  different  suggestions  and  stories.  I 
don’t  know  whether  any  of  them  are  true.” 

“They  could  be  not  true,  but  still  be  of  use,”  said  Poi- 
rot. 

“Well,  I know  what  you  mean,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver, 
“and  that’s  what  1 think,  too.  I mean,  that’s  what  I 


119 


elephants  can  remember 

thought  when  I went  about  it.  When  people  remember 
something  and  tell  you  about  it— 1 mean,  it’s  often  not 
quite  actually  what  occurred,  but  it’s  wliat  they  tliem- 
selves  thought  occurred.” 

“But  they  must  have  had  something  on  which  to 
base  it,”  said  Poirot. 

“I’ve  brought  you  a list  of  a kind,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 
“I  don’t  need  to  go  into  details  of  where  1 went  or  what 
I said  or  why,  I went  out  deliberately  for~.wcll,  infor- 
mation one  couldn’t  perhaps  get  from  anybody  in  this 
country  now.  But  it’s  all  from  peoi>Ie  who  knew  some- 
thing about  the  Ravcnscrofts,  even  if  they  hadn’t 
known  them  very  well.” 

“News  from  foreign  places,  do  you  mean?” 

“Quite  a lot  of  them  were  from  foreif.n  places.  Other 
people  who  knew  them  here  ratlier  slightly  or  from  peo- 
ple whose  aunts  or  cou.sins  or  frieml-s  knew  them  long 
ago.” 

“And  each  one  that  you’ve  noted  down  had  some 
story  to  tell— some  reference  to  the  trag.edy  or  to  people 
involved?” 

“That’s  the  idea,”  said  Mrs,  Oliver.  “I’ll  tell  you 
roughly,  shall  I?” 

“Yes.  Have  a petit  four." 

“Thank  you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

She  took  a particularly  sweet  ami  rather  biliou.s-!ook- 
ing  one  and  champed  it  with  energy. 

“Sweet  things,”  she  said,  “really  give  you  a lot  of 
vitalityj  I always  think.  Well,  now,  I've  got  the  follow- 
ing suggestions.  'I’licsc  things  have  usually  ireen  stiid  to 
mo  starting  by:  *Oh,  yc.s,  of  course!’  ‘Ihw  sad  it  was, 
that  whole  story!’  ‘Of  course,  1 think  everyone  knows 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

But  there  weren’t  reaOy  any  very  good  reasons.  It  was 
just  something  someone  had  told  them,  or  they’d  heard 
either  from  friends  or  servants  or  relations  or  things  like 
that.  The  suggestions,  of  course,  are  all  the  kind  that 
you  might  think  they  were.  A.  That  General  Ravens- 
croft  was  writing  his  memoirs  of  his  Indian  days  and 
that  he  had  a young  woman  who  acted  as  his  secretary 
and  took  dictation  and  typed  things  for  him  and  was 
helping  him,  that  she  was  a nice-looking  girl  and  no 
doubt  there  wa.s  something  there.  The  result  being — 
well,  there  seemed  to  be  two  schools  of  thought.  One 
school  of  thought  was  that  he  shot  his  wife  because  he 
hoped  to  marry  the  girl,  and  then  when  he  had  shot 
her,  'immediately  was  horrdr-stricken  at  what  he’d 
done  and  shot  himself ...” 

“Exactly,”  said  Poirot.  “A  romantic  explanation.” 

“The  other  idea  was  that  there  had  been  a tutor  who 
came  to  give  lessons  to  the  son  who  had  been  ill  and 
away  from  his  prep  school  for  six  months  or'so — a good-  ; 
looking  young  man.”  f | 

“Ah,  yes.  And  the  wife  had  fallen  in  love  with  the  | 
young  man.  Perhaps  had  an  affair  with  him?” 

“That  was  the  idea,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “No  land  of 
evidence.  Just  romantic  suggestion  again.” 

“And  therefore?” 

“Therefore  I tMnk  the  idea  was  that  the  General 
probably  shot  his  wife  and  then  in  a fit  of  remorse  shot 
himself.  There  was  another  story  that  the  General  hac 
had  an  affair,  and  his  wife  found  out  about  it,  that  she 
shot  him  and  then  herself.  It’s  always  been  slightly  dif- 
ferent every  time.  But  nobody  really  knew  anything.  I 
mean,  it’s  always  Just  a likely  story  eve^  time.  I mean, 
the  General  may  have  had  an  affair  with  a girl,  or  lots 
of  girls  or  just  another  married  woman,  or  it  luight  have 
been  the  wife  who  had  an  affair  with  someone.  It’s  beeU; 

121 


elephants  SAN  MEiliBER 

a different  someone  in  each  story  I’ve  been  told.  There 
was  nothing  definite  about  it  or  any  cv.dence  or  it. 
It’s  iust  the  gossip  that  went  around  a!n>u!  twelve  or 
thirteen  years  ago,  which  people  have  rather  forgotten 
about  now.  But  they  remember  enough  about  it  to  tell 
one  a few  names  and  get  things  only  moderately  wrong 
about  what  happened.  There  was  an  angry  gardener 
who  happened  to  live  on  the  place,  there  was  a nice 
elderly  cook-housclceepcr  who  was  lathei  blind  and 
rather  deaf,  but  nobody  seems  to  suspect  that  she  had 
anything  to  do  with  it.  And  so  on,  I ve  got  all  the  names 
and  possibilities  written  down.  The  names  of  some  of 
them  wrong  and  some  of  them  right,  it's  ail  very  difS- 
cult.  His  wife  had  been  ill,  I gather,  for  some  short  time. 

I think  it  was  some  kind  of  fever  that  she  had.  A lot  of 
her  hair  must  have  fallen  out  because  .she  bought  four 
wigs.  There  were  at  least  four  new  wigs  found  among 
her  things.” 

“Yes.  I,  too,  heard  that,”  said  Poirtit. 

“Who  did  you  hear  it  from?” 

“A  friend  of  mine  m the  police.  He  went  back  over 
the  accounts  of  the  inquest  and  the  various  things  in 
the  house.  Four  wigs!  I would  like  to  have  your  opinion 
on  that,  madamc.  Do  you  think  that  ftntr  wigs  seems 
somewhat  excessive?” 

“Well,  I do  rually,”  said  Mr.s.  Oliver.  *i  had  an  aunt 
who  had  a wig,  and  she  had  an  extra  wig,  but  .she  sent 
one  back  to  be  redres-sed  and  wore  the  .second  one.  I 
never  heard  of  anyone  who  had  four  wig.s." 

Mrs.  Oliver  extracted  a small  notebook  from  her  bag, 
ruffled  the  pages  of  it,  searching  for  extracts. 

“Mb.  Carstairs,  idie’s  seventy-seven  and  rather  gaga. 
Quote  from  her:  T do  remember  the  Ravenscrofts 
quite  well.  Yes,  yes,  a very  nice  couple.  It’s  very  sad,  I 
think.  Yes.  Cancer  It  was!'  I asked  them  which  of  tea 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

had  cancer,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “but  Mrs.  Carstairs 
had  rather  forgotten  about  that.  She  said  she  thought 
the  wife  came  to  London  and  consulted  a doctor  and 
had  an  operation  and  then  came  home  and  was  very 
miserable,  and  her  husband  was  very  upset  about  her. 
So  of  course  he  shot  her  and  himself.” 

“Was  that  her  theory  or  did  she  have  any  exact 
knowledge?” 

“I  think  it  was  entirely  theory.  As  far  as  I can  see 
and  hear  in  the  course  of  my  investigations,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver,  making  rather  a point  of  this  last  word,  “when 
anybody  has  heard  that  any  of  their  friends  whom  they 
don’t  happen  to  know  very  well  have  sudden  illnesses 
or  consult  doctors,  they  always  think  it’s  cancer.  And 
so  do  the  people  themselves,  I think.  Somebody  else — I 
can’t  read  her  name  here.  I’ve  forgotten,  I think  it  be- 
gan with  T — she  said  that  it  was  the  husband  who  had 
cancer.  He  was  very  unhappy,  and  so  was  his  wife.  And 
they  talked  it  over  together  and  they  couldn’t  bear  the 
thought  of  it  all,  so  they  decided  to  commit  suicide.” 

“Sad  and  romantic,”  said  Poirot. 

“Yes,  and  I don’t  think  really  true,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 
“It  is  worrying,  isn’t  it?  I mean,  the  people  remember- 
ing so  much  and  that  they  really  mostly  seem  to  have 
made  it  up  themselves.” 

“They  have  made  up  the  solution  of  something  they 
knew  about,”  said  Poirot  “That  is  to  say,  they  know 
that  somebody  comes  to  London,  say,  to  consult  a doc- 
tor, or  that  somebody  has  been  in  hospital  for  two  or 
three  months.  That  is  a fact  that  they  know,”’ 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “and  then  when  they  come 
to  talk  about  it  a long  time  afterwards,  they’ve  got  the 
solution  for  it  which  they’ve  made  up  themselves.  That 
isn’t  awfully  helpful,  is  it?” 

“It  is  helpful,”  said  Ppirot  “You  are  quite  right,  you 
123 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

know,  in  what  you  said  to  me.  ’ 

“About  elephants?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  rather  doubt- 
fully. 

“About  elephants,”  said  Poirot.  “It  is  important  to 
know  certain  facts  which  have  lingered  in  people’s 
memories  although  they  may  not  know  exactly  what  the 
fact  was,  why  it  happened  or  what  kd  to  it.  But  they 
might  easily  know  something  that  we  do  not  know  and 
that  we  have  no  means  of  learning.  So  there  have  been 
memories  leading  to  theories— theories  inlidelity,  of 

illness,  of  suicide  pacts,  of  jealousy.  All  these  things 
have  been  suggested  to  you.  h’urthcr  search  could  be 
made  as  to  points  if  they  seem  in  tiny  way  probable.” 

“People  like  talking  about  the  past,”  said  Mrs.  Oli- 
ver. “They  like  talking  about  the  past  really  much 
more  than  they  like  talking  alunit  what’s  happening 
now,  or  what  happened  last  year,  it  britiiys  things  back 
to  them.  They  tell  you,  of  course,  first  abi)ut  a lot  of 
other  people  that  you  don't  want  to  hear  about  and 
then  you  hear  what  the  other  people  that  they’ve  re- 
membered knew  about  somebody  else  that  they  didn’t 
know  but  they  heard  about.  You  know,  s«^  that  the 
General  and  Lady  Ravenscroft  you  hear  about  is  atone 
remove,  as  it  were,  it’s  like  family  relationships,”  she 
said,  “Yon  know,  first  cousin  ottcc  rcintivcti,  second 
cousin  twice  removed,  all  the  rest  of  it.  t don’t  think 
Fve  been  really  very  helpful,  thtnigh." 

“You  must  not  think  that,”  said  Poirot,  “1  am  pretty 
sure  that  you  will  find  that  some  ctf  these  things  in  your 
agreeable  little  purple-colored  notebook  will  have  som^ 
thing  to  do  with  the  past  tragedy.  I can  tell  ytsu  from 
my  own  inquiries  into  the  ofikia!  accounts  of  these  two 
deaths  that  they  have  remained  a mystery  That  is,  from 
the  police  point  of  view.  They  'were  im  affectionate 

124 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


couple,  there  was  no  gossip  or  hearsay  much  about 
them  of  any  sex  trouble,  there  was  no  illness  discovered 
such  as  would  have  caused  anyone  to  take  their  own 
lives.  I talk  now  only  of  the  time,  you  understand,  im- 
mediately preceding  the  tragedy.  But  there  was  a time 
before  that,  furtlicr  back.” 

“I  know  what  you  mean,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “and 
I’ve  got  something  about  that  from  an  old  Nanny.  An 
old  Nanny  who  is  now — 1 don’t  know,  she  might  be  a 
hundred,  but  I think  she’s  only  about  eighty.  I remem- 
ber her  from  my  childhood  days.  She  wasn’t  very  young 
then.  She  used  to  tell  me  stories  about  people  in  the  Ser- 
vices abroad — imlia,  Egypt,  Siam  and  Hong  Kong  and 
the  rest.” 

“Anything  tliat  interested  you?” 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “there  was  some  tragedy 
that  she  talked  about.  She  seemed  a bit  uncertain  about 
what  it  was.  I’m  not  sure  that  it  had  anything  to  do  with 
the  Ravenscrofts,  it  might  have  been  to  do  with  some 
other  people  out  there  because  she  doesn’t  remember 
surnames  ami  things  very  well.  It  was  a mental  case  in 
one  family.  Someone’s  sister-in-law.  Either  General 
Whoever-it-was’s  sister  or  Mrs.  Whoever-it-was’s  sister,  • 
Somebody  who’d  been  in  a mental  home  for  years.  I 
gathered  she’d  killed  her  own  children  or  tried  to  kill 
her  own  children  long  ago,  and  then  she’d  been  sup- 
posed to  be  cured  or  paroled  or  something  and  came  out 
to  Egypt,  or  India  or  wherever  it  was.  She  cam*  out  to 
stay  with  the  people.  And  then  it  seems  there  was  some 
other  tragedy,  connected  again,  I think,  with  children 
or  something  of  that  kind.  Anyway,  it  was  something 
that  was  hushed  up.  But  I wondered.  I mean,  if  there 
was  something  mental  in  the  family,  either  Lady  Ra- 
venscroft’s  family  or  General  Ravenscroft’s  family.  I 

125 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBEB 

don’t  think  it  need  have  been  as  near  as  a sister.  It  could 
have  been  a cousin  or  something  like  that.  But— welVit 
seemed  to  me  a possible  line  of  inquiry.” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “there’s  always  possibility  and 
somethLg  that  waits  for  many  years  and  then  comes 
home  to  roost  from  somewhere  in  the  past.  That  is 
what  someone  said  to  me.  Old  sins  have  loni>  shadows" 

“It  seemed  to  me.”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “not  that  it  was 
likely  or  even  that  old  Nanny  Matcfiain  remembered  it 
right  or  even  realty  about  it  being  the  pcuiilc  slic  thought 
it  was.  But  it  might  have  fitted  in  with  what  that  awful 

woman  at  the  literary  luncheon  .said  to  me. 

^‘You  mean  when  she  wanted  to  know  . . . 

“Yes.  When  she  wanted  me  to  find  out  from  the 
daughter,  my  godchild,  whether  iier  mother  had 
killed  her  father  or  whether  her  fattier  had  kitled  her 
mother.” 

“And  she  thought  the  girl  might  know?” 

“Well,  it’s  likely  enough  that  the  girl  would  know.  I 
mean,  not  at  the  time~it  might  have  been  shielded 
from  her— but  she  migiit  know  thing.s  about  it  which 
would  make  her  be  aware  what  the  circumstances  were 
in  their  lives  and  who  was  likely  to  have  killed  whom, 
though  she  would  probably  never  mention  it  or  say  any- 
thing about  it  or  talk  to  anyone  about  it.” 

“And  you  .say  that  woman— this  Mrs,—” 

“Yes.  I’ve  forgotten  her  name  now.  Mrs.  Burton 
something.  A name  like  that.  Slie  .said  something  about 
her  son  had  this  girl  friend  and  that  they  were  thinking 
of  getting  married.  And  I can  quite  sec  you  might  want 
to  know,  if  so,  whether  her  mother  or  her  father  had 
criminal  relations  in  their  family  -or  a loony  strain. 
She  probably  thought  that  if  it  was  the  mother  who 
killed  the  father  it  would  be  very  unwise  for  the  boy  to 
marry  her,  whereas  if  the  father  had  killed  the  mother, 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

she  probably  wouldn’t  mind  as  much,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“You  mean  that  she  would  think  that  the  inheri- 
tance would  go  in  the  female  line?” 

“Well,  she  wasn’t  a very  clever  type  of  woman.  Bos- 
sy,” said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Thinks  she  knows  a lot,  but  no.  I 
think  you  might  think  that  way  if  you  were  a woman.” 

“An  interesting  point  of  view,  but  possible,”  said 
Poirot.  “Yes,  1 realize  that.”  He  sighed.  “We  have  a lot 
to  do  still.” 

“I’ve  got  another  sidelight  on  things,  too.  Same  thing, 
but  second  hand,  if  you  know  what  I mean.  You  know. 
Someone  says.  The  Ravenscrofts?  Weren’t  they  that 
couple  who  adopted  a child?  Then  it  seems,  after  it  was 
all  arranged,  and  they  were  absolutely  stuck  on  it — ^very, 
very  keen  on  it,  one  of  their  children  had  died  in  India, 
I think — ^but  at  any  rate  they  had  adopted  this  child  and 
then  its  own  mother  wanted  it  back  and  they  had  a 
court  case  or  something.  But  the  court  gave  them  the 
custody  of  the  child  and  the  mother  came  and  tried  to 
kidnap  it  back.’ ” 

“There  are  simpler  points,”  said  Poirot,  “arising  out 
of  your  report,  points  that  I prefer.” 

“Such  as?” 

“Wigs.  Four  wigs.” 

“Well,”  said  Mr.s.  Oliver,  “I  thought  that  was  inter- 
esting you,  but  I don’t  know  why.  It  doesn’t  seem  to 
mean  anything.  The  Indian  story  was  just  somebody 
mental.  There  are  mental  people  who  are  in  homes  or 
loony-bins  because  they  have  killed  their  children  or 
some  other  child,  for  some  absolutely  batty  reason,  no 
sense  to  it  at  all.  I don’t  see  why  that  would  make  Gen- 
eral and  Lady  Ravenscroft  want  to  kill  themelvw.” 

‘TJnle.ss  one  of  them  was  implicated,”  said  Poirot. 

“You  mean  that  General  Ravenscroft  may  have  killed 
someone,  a boy — an  Uiegitimate  diild,  perhaps,  of  his 

127 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Wife’s  or  of  his  own?  No,  I think  wc’rc  getting  a bit 
too  melodramatic  there.  Or  she  might  have  killed  her 

husband’s  child  or  her  own. 

“And  yet,”  said  Poirot,  “what  people  seem  to  be,  they 

usually  are.” 

“You  mean — ?” 

“They  seemed  an  affectionate  couple--a  couple  who 
lived  together  happily  without  disputes.  They  seem  to 
have  had  no  case  history  of  illness  beyond  a suggestion 
of  an  operation,  of  someone  coming  to  London  to 
consult  some  medical  authority,  a possibility  of  cancer, 
of  leukemia,  something  of  that  kiiul,  some  future  that 
they  could  not  face.  And  yet,  somehow  wc  do  not  seem 
to  get  at  something  beyond  what  is  possiNr,  hut  not  yet 
what  is  probable.  If  there  was  anyone  else  in  the  house, 
anyone  else  at  the  time,  the  police,  my  friends  that  is  to 
say,  who  have  known  the  investigation  at  the  time,  say 
that  nothing  told  was  really  compatible  with  anything 
else  but  with  the  facts.  For  some  reas<.»n,  those  two  didn’t 
want  to  go  on  living.  Why?" 

“I  knew  a couple,”  said  Mrs.  (Tliver,  “in  the  war- 
the  second  war,  I mean— they  fiuvughf  that  the  Ger- 
mans would  land  in  lingland  and  they  had  tlecided  if 
that  happened  they  would  kill  themselves.  1 said  it  was 
very  stupid.  They  said  it  wmild  be  impossible  to  go  on 
living.  It  still  seems  to  me  stupid.  You've  got  to  have 
enough  courage  to  live  Uirough  something,  I mean,  it's 
not  as  though  your  death  was  going  to  do  any  g.iud  to 
anybody  else.  1 wonder — ?” 

“Yes,  what  do  you  wonder?" 

“Well,  when  I said  that  1 wondered  suddenly  if  Gen- 
eral and  l.ady  Ravenscroft’s  deaths  did  any  good  to 
anj^one  else.” 

“You  mean  somebody  inherited  money  from  them?” 

“Yes.  Not  quite  M biatant  as  that,  Pertiaps  «»mo- 

128 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

body  would  have  a better  chance  of  doing  well  in  life. 
Something  there  was  in  their  life  that  they  didn’t  want 
either  of  their  two  children  ever  to  hear  about  or  to 
know  about.”  Poirot  sighed. 

“The  trouble  with  you  is,”  he  said,  “you  think  so  often 
of  something  that  well  have  occurred,  that  might 

have  been.  You  give  me  idea.s.  Possible  ideas.  If  only 
they  were  probable  ideas  tilso.  Why?  Why  were  the 
deaths  of  those  two  necessary?  Why  is  it — they  were 
not  in  pain,  tliey  were  not  in  illne.ss,  they  were  not 
deeply  unhappy  from  what  one  can  see.  'fhen  why,  in 
the  evening  of  a beautiful  day,  did  they  go  for  a walk  to 
a cliff  and  taking  the  dog  with  them  . . .” 

“What’s  the  dog  got  to  do  with  it?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Well,  I wondered  for  a moment.  Did  they  take  the 
dog,  or  did  the  dog  follow  them?  Where  does  the  dog 
come  in?” 

“1  suppose  it  comes  in  like  the  wigs,”  said  Mrs.  Oli- 
ver. “Just  ouc  more  thing  that  you  can’t  explain  and 
doesn’t  seem  to  make  sense.  One  of  my  elephants  said 
the  dog  was  devoted  to  Lady  Ravenscroft,  but  another 
one  said  the  dog  bit  her.” 

“One  always  comes  back  to  the  same  thing,”  said 
Poirot.  “One  wants  to  know  more.”  He  sighed.  “One 
wants  to  know  more  about  the  people,  and  how  can  you' 
know  people  separated  from  you  by  a gulf  of  years?” 

“Well,  you’ve  done  it  once  or  twice,  haven’t  you?” 
said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “You  know — something  about  where 
a painter  was  shot  or  poisoned.  That  was  near  the  sea  on 
a sort  of  fortification  or  something.  You  found  out  who 
did  that,  although  you  didn’t  know  any  of  the  people.” 

“No.  1 didn’t  know  any  of  the  people,  but  I learned 
about  them  from  the  other  people  who  were  there.”* 


iz9 


^Munkr  (n  Heirmpect^ 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Well,  that’s  what  I’m  trying  to  do,”  said  Mrs.  Olivet. 
“Only  I can’t  get  near  enough.  1 can’t  get  to  anyone 
who  really  knew  anything,  who  wa.s  really  involved.  Do 
you  think  really  we  ought  to  give  it  up?” 

“I  think  it  would  be  very  wise  to  give  it  up,”  said  Poi- 
rot,  “but  there  is  a moment  when  one  no  longer  wants 
to  be  wise.  One  wants  to  find  put  more.  I have  an  inter- 
est now  in  that  couple  of  kindly  people,  with  two  nice 
children.  I presume  they  arc  nice  children?” 

“I  don’t  know  the  boy,”  said  Mr.s.  Oliver.  “I  don’t 
think  I’ve  ever  met  him.  Do  you  want  to  sec  my  god- 
daughter? I could  send  her  to  sec  you,  if  you  like.” 

“Yes,  I think  I would  like  to  see  her,  meet  her  some 
way.  Perhaps  she  would  not  wish  to  come  and  see  me, 
but  a meeting  could  be  brought  about.  It  might,  I think, 
be  interesting.  And  there  is  someone  else  I would  like  to 
see.” 

“Oh!  Who  is  that?” 

“The  woman  at  the  party.  The  bossy  woman.  Your 
bossy  friend.” 

“She’s  no  friend  of  mine,”  said  Mr.s.  Oliver.  “She  just 
came  up  and  spoke  to  me,  that’s  all.” 

“You  could  resume  acquainttmcc  with  her?” 

“Oh,  yes,  quite  ea.sily.  I would  think  she’d  probably 
jump  at  it.” 

“I  would  like  to  sec  her.  f would  like  to  kiuvw  why 
she  wants  to  know  these  things.” 

“Yes.  I suppose  that  might  be  useful.  Anyway—” 
Mrs.  Oliver  sighed— *T  shall  be  glad  to  have  a rest  from 
elephants.  Nanny^ — you  know,  the  ohl  Nanny  I talked 
about — she  mentioned  elephants  anti  ihsil  elephants 
didn’t  forget.  That  sort  of  silly  sentenee  is  hegimiing  to 
haunt  me.  Ah,  well,  ym  must  look  for  more  elephants. 
It’s  your  turn.” 

“And  what  about  you?” 


130 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“Perhaps  I could  look  for  swans.” 

‘‘Mon  dieu,  where  do  swans  come  in?” 

“It  is  only  what  I remember,  which  Nanny  reminded 
me  of.  That  there  were  little  boys  I used  to  play  with 
and  one  used  to  call  me  Lady  Elephant  and  the  other 
one  used  to  call  me  Lady  Swan.  When  I was  Lady 
Swan,  I pretended  to  be  swimming  about  on  the  floor. 
When  I was  Lady  Elephant,  they  rode  on  my  back. 
There  are  no  swans  in  this.” 

“That  is  a good  tiring,”  said  Poirot.  “Elephants  are 
quite  enough.” 


10. 

DESMOND 


Two  days  later,  as  Hercale  Poirot  drank  his  morning 
chocolate,  he  read  at  tlie  same  time  a letter  that  had 
been  among  his  correspondence  that  moriiing.  He  was 
reading  it  now  for  the  second  time.  The  handwriting 
was  a moderately  good  one,  though  it  hardly  bore  tte 
stamp  of  maturity. 

Dear  Monsieur  Poirot, 

I am  afraid  you  will  find  tills  letter  of  mine 
somewhat  peculiar,  but  I believe  it  would  help  if  I 
mentioned  a Wend  of  yours.  I tried  to  get  in  touch 
with  her  to  ask  her  if  she  would  arrange  for  me  to 
come  and  see  you,  but  apparetifly  she  had  left 
home.  Her  secretary— I am  referring  to  Mrs.  Ath 

132 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


adne  Oliver,  the  novelist — her  secretary  seemed 
to  say  something  about  her  having  gone  on  a 
safari  in  East  Africa.  If  so,  I can  see  she  may  not 
return  for  some  time.  But  Fm  sure  she  would  help 
me.  I would  indeed  like  to  see  you  so  much.  I am 
badly  in  need  of  advice  of  some  kind. 

Mrs.  Oliver,  I understand,  is  acquainted  with  my 
mother,  who  met  her  at  a literary  luncheon  par- 
ty. If  you  could  give  me  an  appointment  to  visit  you 
one  day,  I should  be  very  grateful.  I can  suit  my 
time  to  anything  you  suggested.  I don’t  know  if  it 
is  helpful  at  all,  but  Mrs.  Oliver’s  secretary  did 
mention  the  word  “elephants.”  I presume  this  has 
something  to  do  with  Mrs.  Oliver’s  travels  in  East 
Africa.  The  secretary  spoke  as  though  it  was  some 
kind  of  password.  I don’t  really  understand  this 
but  perhaps  you  will.  I am  in  a great  state  of  wor- 
ry and  anxiety  and  I would  be  very  grateful  if 
you  could  see  me. 

Yours  truly, 

Desmond  Burton-Cox. 

“Nom  d’un  petit  bonhomme!”  said  Hercule  Poirot. 

“1  beg  your  pardon,  sir?”  said  George. 

“A  mere  ejaculation,”  said  Hercule  Poirot.  “There  are 
some  things,  once  they  have  invaded  your  life,  which 
you  find  very  difficult  to  get  rid  of  again.  With  me  it 
seems  to  be  a question  of  elephants.” 

' . He  left  the  breakfast  table,  summoned  his  faithful 
secretary,  Miss  Lemon,  handed  her  the  letter  from 
Desmond  Cox  and  gave  her  directions  to  arrange  an  ap- 
pointment with  the  writer  of  the  letter. 

“I  am  not  too  occupied  at  the  present  time,”  he  said. 
^“Tomorrow  will  be  quite  suitable.” 

133 


elephants  can  remember 

Miss  Lemon  reminded  him  of  two  appointments 
which  he  ulready  had,  but  agreed  tiiat  tlwt  left  plenty 
of  hours  vacant  and  she  would  arrange  something  as  he 
wished. 

“Something  to  do  with  the  Zoological  Gardens?”  she 
inquired, 

“Hardly,”  said  Poirot.  “No,  do  not  mention  elephants 
in  your  letter.  There  can  be  too  much  of  anything.  El^ 
phants  are  large  animals.  They  occupy  a great  deal  ol 
the  horizon.  Ye:?.  We  can  leave  dephants.  They  will 
no  doubt  arise  in  the  course  of  the  conversation  I pm. 
pose  to  hold  with  Desmond  Burtt)n-C.’ox.” 

“Mr.  Desmond  Burton-Cox,”  annmmced  George,  n4 
ering  in  the  expected  guest. 

Poirot  had  risen  to  his  feet  and  w!i.s  standing  beside 
the  mantelpiece.  He  remained  for  a moment  or  two 
without  speaking,  then  he  advanced,  having  summed 
up  his  own  iropre.sston.  A somevvfjat  nervous  and  en- 
ergetic personality.  Quite  naturally  .so,  Poirot  thoujht 
A little  ill  at  ease  but  managing  to  mask  it  very  suc- 
cessfully. He  said,  cxtentling  a haiut, 

“Mr.  Herculc  Poimt?" 

“That  is  right,”  said  Poirot.  "Anti  ytmr  name  is  Des- 
mond Burton-Cox.  Pray  sit  down  anti  tell  me  what  I 
can  do  for  you,  the  reasons  why  you  have  come  to  see 
me.” 

“ICs  all  going  to  be  rather  diflieult  to  explain,”  saW 
Desmond  Burton-Cox, 

“So  many  things  arc  difficult  to  explain,”  M 
Hcrcule  Poirot,  “but  we  have  pieniy  of  titne.  Sit  dom” 

Desmond  lookmi  rather  doubtfully  at  the  figure  cofr 
fronting  him.  Eeidly.  a very  wmic  peiHonality,  ie 
thought.  The  egg-sltaped  head,  the  big  moustaubeit.  Hot 

m • 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

somehow  very  imposing.  Not  quite,  in  fact,  what  he  had 
expected  to  encounter, 

“You — you  arc  a detective,  aren’t  you?”  he  said.  “I 
mean  you — you  find  out  things.  People  come  to  you  to 
find  out,  or  to  ask  you  to  find  out  things  for  them.” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “that  is  one  of  my  tasks  in  life.” 

“I  don’t  suppose  that  you  know  what  I’ve  come 
about  or  that  you  know  anything  much  about  me.” 

“I  know  something,”  said  Poirot. 

“You  mean  Mrs.  Oliver,  your  friend  Mrs.  Oliver. 
She’s  told  you  something?” 

“She  told  me  that  she  had  had  an  interview  with 
a goddaughter  of  hers,  a Miss  Celia  Ravenscroft.  That 
is  right,  is  it  not?” 

“Yes.  Yes,  Celia  told  me.  This  Mrs.  Oliver,  is  she— 
does  she  also  know  my  mother — ^know  her  well,  I 
mean?” 

“No.  I do  not  think  that  they  know  each  other  well. 
According  to  Mrs.  Oliver,  she  met  her  at  a literary 
luncheon  recently  and  had  a few  words  with  her. 
Your  mother,  I understand,  made  a certain  request  to 
Mrs.  Oliver.”  , 

“She’d  no  business  to  do  so,”  said  the  boy. 

His  eyebrows  came  down  over  his  nose.  He  looked 
angry  now,  angry — almost  revengeful. 

“Really,”  he  said,  “Mother’s— I mean—” 

“I  understand,”  said  Poirot.  “There  is  much  feeling 
these  days,  indeed  perhaps  there  always  has  been.  Moth- 
ers are  continually  doing  things  which  their  cMldrea 
would  much  rather  they  did  not  do.  Am  I right?” 

“Oh,  you’re  right  enough.  But  my  mother'  mean, 
she  interferes  in  things  in  which  really  she  has  no  con- 
cern.” 

“You  and  Celia  Ravenscroft,  1 understand,  are  close' 


135 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Mends  Mrs  Oliver  understood  from  your  mother  that 
there  was  some  question  of  marriage.  Perhaps  in  the 

near  future?”  . . n . r 

“Yes  but  my  mother  really  docsii  t need  to  ask  ques- 
tions and  worry  about  things  which  arc— well,  no  coa- 

cemofhers/'  , 

“But  mothere  are  like  that,”  said  Poirot.  He  smiled 

faintly.  He  added,  “You  arc,  perhaps,  very  much  at 
tached  to  your  mother?” 

“I  wouldn’t  say  that,”  sutil  Desmond.  No.  1 certainly 
wouldn’t  say  that.  You  sce---well,  1 d better  tell  you 
straightaway,  she’s  not  really  my  mother.”^^ 

“Oh,  indeed.  1 had  not  understood  that. 

“I’m  adopted,”  said  Dcsinoiui.  *hhe  had  a son.  A lit- 
tle boy  who  died.  And  then  she  wanted  to  adopt  a child, 
so  I was  adopted,  and  she  hronght  me  uii  as  her  son. 
She  always  speaks  of  me  as  her  son,  aiui  thinks  of  me 
as  her  son,  but  I’m  not  really  her  son.  Wehc  not  a bit 
alike.  We  don’t  look  at  things  the  same  way.” 

“Very  understandable,”  .said  Poirot. 

“I  don’t  seem  to  be  getting  on,"  said  Desmond,  “uda 
what  I want  to  ask  you." 

“^Yau  waiiit  nw  to  tt<>  out  S0I!l^ 

thing,  to  cover  a certain  line  of  interrogation?" 

“1  suppose  that  does  cover  it,  1 lion’t  know  how 
much  you  know  ahout—alrout  well,  what  the  trouble  is 
all  about.” 

“I  know  a little,”  said  Poirot.  “Not  detmls.  I do  not 
know  very  much  about  you  or  about  Miss  Ravers- 
croft,  whom  ! have  not  yet  met.  I d like  to  meet  her. 

“Yes,  well.  I was  thinking  of  hiinging  her  to  talk  to 
you,  but  I thought  Pd  belter  talk  to  you  myself  first.” 

“Well,  that  seems  quite  sensible."  said  Poirot,  "Ym 
are  unhappy  about  something?  Worried?  You  haw# 
ficulUes?” 


m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Not  really.  No.  No,  there  shouldn’t  be  any  diffi- 
culties. There  aren’t  any.  What  happened  is  a thing 
that  happened  years  ago  when  Celia  was  only  a child,  or 
a schoolgirl  at  least.  And  there  was  a tragedy,  the  sort 
of  thing  that  happens— well,  it  happens  every  day,  any 
time.  Two  people  you  know  whom  something  has  upset 
very' much  and  they  commit  suicide.  A sort  of  suicide 
pact,  this  was.  Nobody  knew  very  much  about  it  or 
why,’  or  anything  like  that.  But,  after  all,  it  happens 
and ’it’s  no  business  really  of  people’s  children  to  woi^ 
about  it.  ! mean,  if  they  know  the  facts,  that’s  quite 
enough,  1 should  think.  And  it’s  no  business  of  my 

mother’s  at  all.”  _ . . „ 

“As  one  journeys  through  life,”  said  Poirot,  one 
finds  more  and  more  that  people  are  often  interested  in 
things  that  are  none  of  their  own  business.  Even 
more  so  than  they  are  in  things  that  could  be  consid- 
ered as  their  own  business.” 

“But  this  is  all  over.  Nobody  knew  much  about  it  or 
anything.  But,  you  see,  my  mother  keeps  asking  ques- 
Tons.  Wants  tci  know  things,  and  she’s  got  at  Celia.  She’s 
got  Celia  into  a state  where  she  doesn’t  really  know 
whether  she  wants  to  marry  me  or  not.” 

“And  you?  You  know  if  you  want  to  marry  her  still? 

“Yes,  of  course  I know.  I mean  to  marry  her.  Im 
quite  determined  to  marry  her.  But  she’s  got  upset.  Ste 
wants  to  know  things.  She  wants  to  know  why  all  this 
happened  and  she  thinks — Fm  sure  she’s  wrong  e 
thinks  that  my  mother  knows  something  about  it.  lhat 

she’s  heard  something  about  it.”  t»  • ♦. 

“Well,  I have  much  sympathy  for  you,’  said  Poirot, 
“but  it  seems  to  me  that  if  you  are  sensible  young  people 
and  if  you  want  to  marty,  there  is  no  reason  why  you 
should  not.  I may  say  that  I have  been  given  some  in- 
formation at  my  request  about  this  sad  tragedy.  As  you 

137 


ELEPHANTS  SAH  HEMEiBEI 

sav  it  is  a matter  that  happened  many  years  ago.  There 
wi  no  full  explanation  of  it.  There  never  has  been.  But 
in  life  one  cannot  have  explanations  ol:  all  the  sad  things 

^^“It^wara  suicide  pact,”  said  the  boy.  “It  couldn’t 
have  been  anything  else.  But— well . . .”  _ 

“You  want  to  know  the  cause  ol  it.  Is  that  it ? 

“Well,  yes,  that’s  it.  That’s  what  Celia’s  been  wor- 
ried about,  and  she’s  almost  made  me  \vorricd.  Certain- 
Iv  my  mother  is  worried,  though,  a.s  1 vc  .said,  its  ab- 
solutely no  business  of  hers.  1 don’t  think  any  fault  is 
attached  to  anyone.  1 mean,  there  wasn’t  a row  or 
anything.  The  trouble  is,  of  course,  that  wi;  don’t  know, 
wil,  1 mean,  I shouldn’t  know  anyway  because  I 
wasn’t  there.”  . , , „ 


“Ya!i  flidri’t  know  Oenera!  anti  L 


Celia?” 

“Fve  known  Celia  more  or  less  all  my  life.  You  see, 
the  people  I went  to  for  hoIiday.s  and  her  people  lived 
next  door  to  each  other  when  we  were  very  young.  You 
know— just  children.  And  we  always  liked  each  other, 
and  got  on  together  and  all  that.  And  tfini,  of  course,  for 
a long  time  all  that  pas.sed  over.  I didn  t meet  Cells 
for  a great  many  ycar.s  after  that.  Her  parents,  you 
sec,  were  in  Malaya,  and  so  were  nune.  I think  they 
met  each  other  again  there—l  ttiean  my  father  and 
mother.  My  father’s  dead,  by  the  way.  Hut  I think  when 
my  mother  was  in  India  she  heard  things  and  she’s 
remembered  now  what  she  heard  anti  she's  worked  her- 
self up  about  them  and  she  mti  of —.sort  of  thinks  things 
that  can’t  possibly  be  mse.  Tin  sure  they  aren’t  ttne. 
But  she’s  determined  to  worry  Celia  about  them.  1 want 
to  know  what  really  hapiKiied.  Celia  wants  to  know 
what  really  happened.  What  it  wa-s  ail  about.  Ami  why? 
And  how?  Not  j»#l  people’s  silly  stories.” 


138 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “it  is  not  unnatural  perhaps  that 
you  should  both  feel  that.  Celia,  I should  imagine,  more 
than  you.  She  is  more  disturbed  by  it  than  you  are.  But, 
if  I may  say  so,  docs  it  really  matter?  What  matters  is 
the  now,  the  present.  The  girl  you  want  to  marry,  die 
girl  who  wants  to  marry  you — what  has  the  past  to  do 
with  you?  Does  it  matter  whether  her  parents  had  a 
suicide  pact  or  whether  they  died  in  an  airplane  acci- 
:dent  or  one  of  them  was  killed  in  an  accident  and  the 
other  one  later  ccmimitted  suicide?  Whether  there  were 
love  affairs  which  came  into  their  lives  and  made  for 
unhappiness.” 

“Yes,”  said  Desmond  Burton-Cox,  “yes,  I think  what 
you  say  is  sensible  and  quite  right  but — well,  things 
have  been  built  up  in  such  a way  that  I’ve  got  to 
make  sure  that  Celia  is  satisfied.  She’s — she’s  a person 
who  minds  about  things  although  she  doesn’t  talk  about 
them  much.” 

“Has  it  not  occurred  to  you,”  said  Hercule  Poirot, 
“that  it  may  be  very  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  find 
out  what  really  happened?” 

“You  mean  which  of  them  killed  the  other  or  why, 
or  that  one  shot  the  other  and  then  himself.  Not  unless 
-—not  unless  there  had  been  something.” 

“Yes,  but  that  something  would  have  been  in  the  past, 
so  why  does  it  matter  now?” 

“It  oughtn’t  to  matter — ^it  wouldn’t  matter  but  for  my 
mother  interfering,  poking  about  in  things.  It  wouldn’t 
have  mattered.  I don’t  .suppose  that,  well,  Celia’s  ever 
thought  much  about  it,  I think  probably  that  she  was 
away  at  school  in  Switzerland  at  the  time  the  tragedy 
happened  and  nobody  told  her  much  and,  well,  when 
you’re  a teen-ager  or  younger  still  you  just  accept  things 
as  something  that  happened,  but  that’s  not  anything  to 
do  with  you  really.” 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEIBEE 

-Then  don't  jou  think  thnt  perhaps  yon're  wanS., 
the  impossible?”  „ pcsnumd.  "Perhaps  it’s 

J.h™X“4t-Wyon  can  hnc,  ..„i,  or  that,™ 

like  finding  out  finding  out.”  suid  Poirot.  “In 

have  no  objection  shall  Isay, 

fact  one  has  ‘ -i  matter  tif  grief,  sur- 

'^”®"1hock  1ncss~-thcy  are  human  tn.yydies  hu- 
and  it  is  only  natural  thnt  .1  ones  at- 
man  one  shiUiU!  want  to  know.  What 

rr”"^t;r»ar,.or:,tr^ 

I say  ■ ‘ ncaHituMul, ' tMit  you  see  . . . 

«A«d  ato.”  I’oin".  i"'tr...l’>i'>!'.  kin;.  MoO  ?«. 

agret  wUh  ma.ha.  i.fcra.hrra,.  itarg  p 

„i,h  I ‘hi"k  d 

“Very  interesting,  sniu  i o«u«.  .» 

would  be  quite  possible?” 

“Because — ” „ 

“Of  what?  You  have  a reason. 

“I  think  there  arc  people  who  would  know.  I think 
there  arc  people  who  rmiM  tell  you  it  they  wne  wimg 
to  tell  you.  People,  perhaps,  who  would  not  wish  to 
lell  me,  who  would  no!  wish  to  tell  < 'clia,  but  yoa  might 
find  out  from  them." 

‘That  m micmilm.  . 

“Things  happened,"  said  l>esino«d.  Hungs  ha^ 
pened  in  the  past.  I Pw  sort  ot  hea.d  about  them  in 
n vmiie  way.  There  was  some  meiilut  iioiihle.  there 
was' someone—I  don’t  know  who  esaetly,  I thmk  it 
might  have  been  Lady  Ravenscrofi  ! ihmk  she  \m  a 
a Imta!  home  for  years,  Quite  a long  «n»r.  Some^' 
edy  had  happened  when  *hc  was  mute  young.  hoa» 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


child  who  died  or  an  accident.  Something  that — ^well, 
she  was  concerned  in  it  in  some  way.” 

“It  is  not  what  you  know  of  your  own  knowledge,  I 

presume?” 

“No.  It’s  something  my  mother  said.  Something  she 
heard.  She  heard  it  in  India,  I think.  Gossip  there  from 
other  people.  You  know  how  they  get  together  in  the 
Services,  people  like  that,  and  the  women  all  gossip 
together^ — all  the  mem-sahibs.  Saying  things  that 
mightn’t  be  true  at  all.” 

“And  you  want  to  know  whether  they  were  true  or 
were  not  true?” 

“Yes,  and  1 don’t  know  how  to  find  out  myself.  Not 
now,  because  it  was  a long  time  ago  and  I don’t  know 
who  to  ask.  1 don’t  know  who  to  go  to,  but  until  we  real- 
ly find  out  what  did  happen  and  why — ” 

“What  you  mean  is,”  said  Poirot,  “at  least  I think  I 
am  right,  only  this  is  pure  surmise  on  my  part,  Celia  Ra- 
venscroft  docs  not  want  to  marry  you  unless  she  is 
quite  sure  that  there  is  no  mental  flaw  passed  to  her 
presumably  by  her  mother.  Is  that  it?” 

“I  think  that  is  what  she  has  got  into  her  head  some- 
how. And  I think  my  mother  put  it  there.  I think  it’s 
what  my  mother  wants  to  believe.  I don’t  think  she’s 
any  reason  really  for  believing  it  except  ill-mannered 
spite  and  gossip  and  all  the  rest  of  it.” 

“It  will  not  be  a very  easy  thing  to  investigate,”  said 
Poirot. 

“No,  but  Pvc  heard  things  about  you.  They  say  that 
you’re  very  clever  at  finding  out  what  did  happen.  Ask- 
ing people  question.s  and  getting  them  to  tell  you  things.” 

“Whom  do  you  suggest  I should  question  or  ask? 
When  you  say  India,  I presunae  you  are  not  referring  to 
people  of  Indian  nationality.  Ifou  are  speaking  of  what 
you  might  call  tlie  raem-sehib  days,  the  days  when 

141 


ELEPHAHTS  CAH  REMEMBER 

there  were  Service  communities  in  India.  You  are  speaks 
ing  of  English  people  and  the  gossip  in  some  EngM 

station  there.”  , . » 1 1 , 

“I  don’t  really  mean  that  that  would  be  any  good 

now  I think  whoever  it  was  who  gossipcii,  who  talked 
—I  mean,  it’s  so  long  ago  now  that  lliey’d  have  forgot- 
ten aU  about  it,  that  they  are  probtibly  dead  themselves. 
I think  that  my  mother’s  got  a lot  of  things  wrong,  that 
she’s  heard  things  and  made  up  more  things  about  them 

in  her  mind.”  , , „ 

“And  you  stiU  think  that  I would  be  capable-—” 
“Well,  I don’t  mean  that  1 want  you  to  go  out  to  In- 
dia and  ask  people  things.  I mean,  jumc  of  the  people 
would  be  there  now.” 

“So  you  diink  you  could  not  give  rnc  name.s?” 

“Not  those  sort  of  names,”  said  l^esmond. 

“But  some  names?” 

“Well,  I’ll  come  out  with  what  1 mean.  I tliink  there 
are  two ’people  who  might  know  what  happened  and 
why.  Because,  you  sec,  they’d  have  been  ihm.  They’d 
have  known,  really  known,  of  tlieir  rwn  knowledge.” 
“You  do  not  want  to  go  to  thenr  yourself?” 

“Well,  I could.  I have  irt  a way.  but  I tion’t  think,  yon 
see,  that  they — I don’t  know.  I wouldn’t  like  to  ask 
some  of  the  things  I want  to  a,sk.  I don’t  drink  Celia 
would.  They’re  very  nice,  and  thaf’.s  M'/»y  they’d  know. 
Not  because  they’re  na.sty,  not  because  tliey  gossip,  hut 
because  they  might  liavc  hcljicd.  T hey  might  have  done 
something  to  make  things  better,  or  hiivc  tried  to  do  so, 
only  they  couldn’t.  Oh,  I’m  putting  H all  so  badly." 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “you  arc  doing  it  very  well,  and  I 
am  interested  and  I think  you  h.avc  somethirig  definite 
in  your  mind.  TeU  me,  does  Celia  Haveuscroft  agree 
with  you?” 


m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“I  haven’t  said  too  much  to  her.  You  see,  she  was 
very  fond  of  Maddy  and  of  Zelie.” 

“Maddy  and  Zelie?” 

“Oh,  well,  that’s  their  names.  Oh,  I must  explain. 
I haven’t  done  it  very  well.  You  see,  when  Celia  was 
quite  a child — at  the  time  when  I first  knew  her,  as 
I say,  when  we  were  living  next  door  in  the  country — 
she  had  a French  sort  of — ^well,  I suppose  nowadays  we 
call  it  an  au  pair  girl,  but  it  was  called  a governess 
then.  You  know,  a French  governess.  A mademoiselle. 
And  you  see,  she  was  very  nice.  She  played  with  all  of 
us  children  and  Celia  always  called  her  Maddy  for 
short — and  all  the  family  called  her  Maddy.” 

“Ah,  yes.  The  mademoiselle.” 

“Yes,  you  see  being  French,  I thought — thou^t 
perhaps  she  would  tell  you  things  that  she  knew  and 
wouldn’t  wish  to  speak  about  to  other  people.” 

“Ah.  And  the  other  name  you  mentioned?” 

“Zelie.  The  same  sort  of  thing,  you  see.  A inade- 
moiselle.  Maddy  was  there,  I think,  for  about  two  or 
three  years  and  then,  later,  she  went  back  to  France,  or 
Switzerland  I think  it  was,  and  this  other  one  came. 
Younger  than  Maddy  was  and  we  didn’t  call  her  Maddy. 
Celia  called  her  Z61ie.  All  the  family  called  her  Klie. 
She  was  very  young,  pretty  and  great  fun.  We  were  all 
frightfully  fond  of  her.  She  played  games  with  us  and 
we  all  loved  her.  The  family  did.  And  General  Ra- 
venscroft  was  very  taken  with  her.  They  used  to  play 
games  together,  picquet,  you  know,  and  lots  of  things.” 

“And  Lady  Ravenscroft?” 

“Oh,  she  was  devoted  to  ZZlie  too,  and  Z61ie  was 
'devoted  to  her.  That’s  why  she  came  back  again  after 
she’d  left,” 

“Came  back?” 


143 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Yes,  when  Lady,  Ravenscrof t was  ill,  and  had  been 
in  hospital,  Zelie  came  back  and  was  sent  ci!  companion 
to  her  and  looked  after  her.  1 don’t  know,  but  I be> 
lieve,  I think,  I’m  almost  sure  that  she  was  there  when  it 
—the  tragedy— happened.  And  so,  yon  see  .she’d  know 
—what  really  happened.” 

“And  you  know  her  address?  You  know  where  shois 
now?” 

“Yes.  I know  where  .she  is.  I’ve  got  her  address.  I’ve 
got  both  their  addrc.sscs.  I thought  perhaps  yon  could  go 
and  see  her,  or  both  of  them.  1 know  it’s  a lot  to  ask—" 
He  broke  off. 

Poirot  looked  at  him  for  .some  ntiniitcs.  Then  he 
said:  “Yes,  it  is  a possibility — certainly — a po.ssibility.” 


144 


loot  II 

LONG  SHADOWS 


11. 

SUPERINTENDENT  GARROWAY  AND 
POIROT  COMPARE  NOTES 


Superintendent  Garroway  looked  across  the  table  at 
Poirot.  His  eyes  twinkled.  At  his  side  George  delivered 
a whisky  and  soda.  Passing  on  to  Poirot,  he  put  down 
a glass  filled  with  a dark  purple  liquid. 

“What’s  your  tipple?”  said  Superintendent  Garroway 
with  some  interest. 

“A  syrup  of  black  currant,”  said  Poirot. 

“Well,  well,”  said  Superintendent  Garroway,  “ev- 
eryone to  their  own  taste.  What  was  it  Spence  told  me? 
He  told  me  you  used  to  drink  something  called  a tisane, 
wasn’t  it?  '^at’s  that,  a variant  of  French  piano  or 
something?” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “it’s  useful  for  reducing  fevers.” 

“Ah.  Invalid  dope  of  some  kind.”  He  drank  from  his 
glass.  “Well,”  he  smd,  “here’s  to  suicide!” 


ELEPHANTS  GAN  REMEMBER 

“It  was  suicide?”  Poirot  asked. 

“What  else  can  it  be?”  said  Superintendent  Garro- 
way.  “The  things  you  wanted  to  know!”  Me  shook  his 
heal  His  smile  grew  more  pronounced. 

“I  am  sorry,”  said  Poirot,  “to  have  troubled  you  so 
much.  I am  hke  the  animal  or  the  child  in  one  of  your 
stories  by  Mr.  Kipling.  1 suller  from  insatiable  curi- 
osity,’’ 

“Insatiable  curiosity,”  said  Superintendent  Garro- 
way.  “Nice  stories  he  wrote,  Kipling.  Knew  his  stu5, 
too.  They  told  me  once  that  that  man  could  go  for  one 
short  tour  round  a destroyer  and  know  more  about  it 
than  one  of  the  top  engineers  in  the  Royal  Navy.” 

“Alas,”  said  Hercule  Poind,  “1  do  not  know  every- 
thing. Therefore,  you  see,  1 have  to  ask  questions.  I am 
afraid  that  I sent  you  ratlwr  a long  list  of  questions." 

“What  intrigued  me,”  said  Superintendent  Garroway, 
“is  the  way  you  jumped  fn>m  one  thing  to  another, 
Psychiatrists,  doctors’  reports,  how  money  was  left,  who 
had  money,  who  got  money.  Who  expected  money  and 
didn’t  get  money,  particulars  of  ladies’  hairdressing, 
wigs,  name  of  the  supplier  of  wigs,  charming  row- 
colored  cardboard  boxes  they  came  in.  by  the  way." 

“You  knew  all  these  things,”  said  in.»irot.  “Ihat  has 
amazed  me,  I can  assure  you.” 

"Ah,  well,  it  was  a puzzling  case  and  of  course  m 
made  full  rlotes  on  the  subject.  None  of  this  was  any 
good  to  us,  but  we  kept  the  files  and  it  was  all  there  if 
one  wanted  to  look  for  it." 

He  pushed  a piece  of  paper  across  the  table. 

“Here  you  are.  Hairdressers.  Bond  Street.  Expensive 
firai.  Eugene  and  Rosentelle  was  the  name  of  it.  Thi^ 
moved  later.  Same  firm  but  went  into  business  in  8!oa» 
Street.  Here’s  the  address,  but  it’s  a i>et  sluq)  now.  Two 
of  their ’aaistaats  retired  stn«c  yi-.-.r,  isow,  bat 

m 


elephants  CAN  REMEMBER 

they  were  the  top  assistants  serving  people  then,  and 
Lady  Rayenscroft  was  on  their  list.  Rosentelle  lives  in 
Cheltenham  now.  Still  in  the  same  line  of  business. 
Calls  herself  a hair  styUst— that’s  the  up-to-date  term 
—and  you  add  beautician.  Same  man,  different  hat,  as 
one  used  to  say  in  my  young  days.” 

. “Ah-ha!”  said  Poirot. 

“Why  ah-ha?”  asked  Garroway. 

“I  am  immensely  obliged  to  you,”  said  Hercule  Poi- 
rot. “You  have  presented  me  with  an  idea.  How  strange 
it  is  the  way  ideas  arrive  into  one’s  head.” 

“You’ve  too  many  ideas  in  your  head  already,”  said 
the  Superintendent.  “That’s  one  of  your  troubles — ^you 
don’t  need  any  more.  Now  then,  I’ve  checked  up  as 
well  as  I could  on  the  family  history — nothing  much 
there.  Alistair  Ravenscroft  was  of  Scottish  retraction. 
Father  was  a clergyman — ^two  uncles  in  the  Army — 
both  quite  distinguished.  Married  Margaret  Preston- 
Grey — well-born  girl — presented  at  Court  and_^all  the 
rest  of  it.  No  family  scandals-  You  were  quite  right 
about  her  being  one  of  twdn  sisters.  Don’t  know  where 
you  picked  that  up — Dorothea  and  Margaret  Preston- 
Grey — known  colloquially  as  Dolly  and  MoUy.  Pres- 
ton-Greys  lived  at  Hatters  Green  in-  Sussex.  Identical 
twius--u.Huai  kind  of  history  of  that  kind  of  twin.  Cut 
their  first  tooth  the  same  day-r-both  got  scarlet  fever 
the  santo  month — wore  the  same  kind  of  clothes — ^feU 
in  love  with  the  same  kind  of  man — ^got  married  about 
the  same  time — both  husbands  in  the  Army.  Family 
doctor  who  jittcndcd  the  family  when  they  were  young 
died  .some  years  ago,  so  there’s  nothing  of  interest  to  be 
got  out  of  him.  There  was  aa^arly  tragedy,  though,  con- 
nected with  one  of  them.” 

“Lady  Ravenscroft?”  . 

“No,  the  other  one — she  married  a Captain  Jarrow 

/.3149 


EEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

—had  two  chadren;  the  younger  one,  a boy  of  four, 
was  knocked  down  by  a wheelbarrow  or  Kome  kind  of 
a chEd’s  garden  toy— or  a spade  or  a cfiild’s  hoe.  Hit 
him  on  his  head  and  he  fell  into  an  artificial  pond  or 
something  and  drowned.  Apparently  it  was  the  older 
child,  a girl  of  nine,  who  did  it  I’hcy  were  playing  to- 
gether and  quarreled,  a.s  chiklrcn  do.  Doesn’t  seem 
much  doubt,  but  there  W(U'  another  story.  Someone  smd 
the  mother  did  it— got  angry  and  hit  him-~and  some- 
one else  said  it  was  a woman  who  hved  next  door  who 
hit  him.  Don’t  suppose  it’s  any  interest  to  you— no 
bearing  on  a suicide  pact  entered  into  by  the  mother’s 
sister  and  her  husband  years  after.” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “it  does  not  .seem  to.  But  one  likes 
to  know  background.” 

“Yes,”  said  Garroway,  “as  1 toUl  you,  one  has  to 
look  into  the  past.  I can’t  say  we’il  thought  of  looking  in- 
to the  past  as  long  ago  as  this.  1 mean,  as  I’ve  said,  all 
this  was  twenty  years  before  the  suicide.” 

“Were  there  any  proceedings  at  the  time?” 

“Yes.  I managed  to  fook  up  the  ca.se.  Accounts  of  It 
Newspaper  accounts.  Various  things.  'Fhcrc  were  some 
doubts  about  it,  you  know.  I'he  inoflicr  was  badly  af- 
fected. She  broke  down  completely  and  had  to  go  into 
hospital  Ihey  do  say  she  was  never  the  same  mtsm 
again  afterwards,” 

“But  diey  thought  she  had  done  it?” 

“Well,  that’s  what  the  diKtor  thought.  There  was  no 
direct  evidence,  you  undewtand.  She  said  that  she  had 
seen  this  happen  from  a window,  that  .she’d  seen  to 
older  child,  the  ©rl,  hit  the  boy  and  push  him  in.  But 
her  account — well,  I don’t  think  they  believed  it  «t  to 
time.  She  talked  so  wildly." 

“There  was,  1 suppose,  some  psychiatric  evideneef 

“Yes.  She  went  to  a nursing  home  or  hospital  of  some 

150 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


kind,  she  was  definitely  a mental  case.  She  was  a good 
long  time  in  one  or  two  different  establishments  having 
treatment,  I believe  under  the  care  of  one  of  the 
specialists  from  St.  Andrew’s  Hospital  in  London.  In 
the  end  she  was  pronounced  cured,  and  released  after 
about  three  years,  and  sent  home  to  lead  a normal  life 
with  her  family.” 

“And  she  was  then  quite  normal?” 

“She  was  always  neurotic,  I believe — ” 

“Where  was  she  at  the  time  of  the  suicide?  Was  she 
staying  with  the  Ravenscrofts?” 

“No — she  had  died  nearly  three  weeks  before  that. 
She  was  staying  with  them  at  Overcliffe  when  it  hap- 
pened. It  seemed  again  to  be  an  illustration  of  the  iden- 
tical twin  destiny.  She  walked  in  her  sleep — ^had  suf- 
fered from  that  over  a period  of  years,  it  seems.  She  had 
had  one  or  two  minor  accidents  that  way.  She  some- 
times took  too  many  tranquilizers  and  that  resulted  in 
her  walking  round  the  house  and  sometimes  out  of  it 
during  the  night.  She  was  following  a path  along  the 
cliff  edge,  lost  her  footing  and  fell  over  the  cliff.  Killed 
immediately.  They  didn’t  find  her  until  the  next  day. 
Her  sister,  Lady  Ravenscroft,  was  terribly  upset.  They 
were  very  devoted  to  each  other  and  she  had  to  be  tak- 
en to  hospital  suffering  from  shock.” 

“Could  this  tragic  accident  have  led  to  the  Ravens- 
crofts’suicide  some  months  later?” 

“There  was  never  a su^estion  of  such  a thing.” 

“Odd  things  happen  with  twins,  as  you  say,  Lady 
Ravenscroft  might  have  killed  herself  because  of  the 
link  between  her  and  her  twin  sister.  Then  the  husband 
may  have  shot  himself  because  possibly  he  felt  guilty 
in  some  way — ” 

Superintendent  Garroway  said:  “You  have  too  many 
ideas,  Poirot.  Alistair  Ravenscroft  coul^g^^^had  an 

151 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

affair  with  his  sister-in-law  without  everyone  knowing 
about  it.  There  was  nothing  of  that  kind — if  that’s  what 
you’ve  been  imagining.” 

The  telephone  rang.  Poirot  rose  and  answered  it  ft 
was  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Monsieur  Poirot,  can  you  come  to  tea  or  sherry  to- 
morrow? I have  got  Celia  coming— and  later  on  the 
bossy  woman.  That’s  what  you  wanted,  isn’t  it?” 

Poirot  said  it  was  just  what  he  wanted. 

“Fve  got  to  dash  now,”  said  Mr.s.  Oliver,  “going  to 
meet  an  old  war  horse— provided  by  my  elephant  Num- 
ber One,  Julia  Carstairs.  1 think  slie’s  got  his  name 
wrong— she  always  does — but  1 hope  she’s  got  his  ad- 
dress right.” 


152 


12. 

CELIA  MEETS  HERCULE  POIROT 


“Well,  madame,”  said  Poirot,  “and  how  did  you  fare 
with  Sir  Hugo  Foster?” 

“To  begin  with,  his  name  wasn’t  Foster — it  was 
Fothergill.  Trust  Julia  to  get  a name  wrong.  She’s  al- 
ways doing  it.” 

“So  elephants  are  not  always  reliable  in  the  names 
they  remember?” 

“Don't  talk  of  elephante — I’ve  finished  with  ele- 
phants.” 

“And  your  war  horse?” 

“Quite  an  old  pet — but  useless  as  a source  of  in- 
formation. Obsessed  by  some  people  called  Marchant 
who  did  have  a child  killed  in  an  accident  in  India.  But 
nothing  to  do  with  the  Ravenscrofts.  I tell  you.  I’ve  fin- 
ished with  elephants—” 


IB 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Madame,  you  have  been  most  persevering,  most 

noble.”  , ,,  , 

“Celia  is  coming  along  in  about  halt  an  hour’s  time, 
You  wanted  to  meet  her,  didn’t  you?  Fve  told  her  that 
you  are— well,  helping  me  in  this  matter.  Or  would  you 
rather  she' came  to  see  you?” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “I  think  I should  like  her  to  come 
in  the  way  you  have  arranged.” 

“I  don’t  suppose  she’ll  stay  very  long.  If  we  get  rid  of 
her  in  about  an  hour,  that  would  be  all  riglu,  just  to 
think  over  things  a hit,  and  then  Nlis.  Iluiton-Cox  is 
coming.” 

“Ah,  yes.  That  will  be  interesting.  Yes,  that  will  be 
yery  interesting,” 

Mrs.  Oliver  sighed.  “Oh.  dear,  it’s  a pity,  though, 
isn’t  it?”  She  said  again,  “Wc  do  have  too  much  ma- 
terial, don’t  we?” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot.  “We  do  not  kmnv  what  we  are 
looking  for.  All  wc  know  of  still  is,  in  all  probability, 
the  double  suicide  of  a marricil  cmiide  wlio  lived  quiet 
and  happy  lives  together.  And  what  luive  we  got  to 
show  for  cause,  for  reason?  We’ve  gone  forward  and 
back  to  the  right,  to  the  left,  to  the  west,  to  the  cast.” 

“Quite  right,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “livcrywhere.  We 
haven’t  been  to  the  North  Pole  yet,”  sfie  added. 

“Nor  to  the  South  Pole,”  said  Poirot, 

“So  what  is  there,  when  it  all  conies  tii  it?” 

“Varioas  things,”  .said  Poirot  “1  have  niiide  here  a 
list  Do  you  want  to  read  it?” 

Mrs.  Oliver  came  over  and  sat  besitie  liim  and  looked 
over  his  shoulder. 

"Wigs,”  she  said,  pointing  to  the  fust  item.  “Why  wig! 
first?” 

"Four  wigs,”  said  Poirot,  “seem  to  be  interesting.  In- 
teresting and  rather  difficult  to  solve.” 

154 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“I  believe  tbe  shop  she  got  her  wigs  from  has  gone 
out  of  the  trade  now.  People  go  to  quite  different  places 
for  wigs  and  they’re  not  wearing  so  many  as  they  did 
just  then.  People  used  to  wear  wigs  to  go  abroad.  You 
know,  because  it  saves  bother  in  traveling.” 

“Yes,  yes,”  said  Poirot,  “we  will  do  what  we  can 
with  wigs.  Anyway,  that  is  one  thing  that  interests  me. 
And  then  there  are  other  stories.  Stories  of  mental  dis- 
turbance in  the  family.  Stories  of  a twin  sister  who  was 
mentally  disturbed  and  spent  a good  many  years  of  her 
life  in  a mental  home.” 

“It  doesn’t  seem  to  lead  anywhere,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 
“I  mean  to  say,  I suppose  she  could  have  come  and 
shot  the  two  of  them,  but  I don’t  really  see  why.” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “the  fingerprints  on  the  revolver 
were  definitely  only  the  fingerprints  of  General  Ravens- 
croft  and  his  wife,  I understand.  Then  there  are  stories 
of  a child.  A child  in  India  was  murdered  or  attacked, 
possibly  by  this  twin  sister  of  Lady  Ravenscroft.  Pos- 
sibly by  some  quite  different  woman— possibly  by  an 
ayah  or  a servant.  Point  two.  You  know  a little  more 
about  money.” 

“Where  does  money  come  into  it?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver 
in  some  surprise. 

“It  does  not  come  into  it,”  said  Poirot.  “That  is  what 
is  so  interesting.  Money  usually  comes  in.  Money  some- 
one got  as  a result  of  that  suicide.  Money  lost  as  a 
result  of  it.  Money  somewhere  causing  difficulties, 
causing  trouble,  causing  covetousness  and  desire.  It  is 
difficult,  that.  Difficult  to  see.  There  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  any  large  amount  of  money  anywhere.  There 
are  various  stories  of  love  affairs,  women  who  were  at- 
tractive to  the  husband,  men  who  were  attractive  to  the 
wife.  An  affair  there  one  side  or  the  other  could  have 
led  to  suicide  or  to  murder.  It  very  often  does.  Then  we 

"155 


ElEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

come  to  what  at  the  moment  inclines  me  to  the  most 
interest.  That  is  why  I am  so  anxiou.s  lo  meet  Mrs, 
Burton-Cox.” 

“Oh.  That  awful  woman.  I don’t  .see  why  you  think 
she’s  important.  AH  she  did  was  to  yci  being  a nosey, 
parker  and  wanting  me  to  find  out  thinp.s.” 

“Yes,  but  why  did  she  want  you  to  find  out  things?  , 
It  seems  to  me  very  odd,  that.  If  seems  to  me  that  that 
is  something  that  one  has  to  find  out  about.  She  is  the 
link,  you  see.” 

“The  link?” 

“Yes.  We  do  not  know  what  the  link  was,  where  | 
was,  how  it  was.  All  we  know  i.s  that  slic  wants  desper- 
ately to  learn  more  about  this  suieide.  Being  a link,  she 
connects  both  with  your  godcltikl,  Celia  Ravenscroft, 
and  with  the  son  who  is  not  her  son,” 

“Wliat  do  you  mean~not  licr  son?” 

“He  is  an  adopted  son,”  .said  Poirot.  “A  son  she 
adopted  because  her  own  son  diet!.” 

“How  did  her  own  child  die?  Why?  Wfien?” 

“All  these  thing.s  1 asked  myself.  She  could  he  a 
link,  a link  of  emotion,  a wish  for  revenge  throng 
hatred,  through  some  love  alTair,  At  any  rtitc  I mast  see 
her.  I must  make  up  my  mind  about  her.  Yes. ! cannot 
help  but  think  that  is  very  importiint." 

There  was  a ring  at  the  bcl!  and  Mrs.  Oliver  went 
out  of  the  room  to  aiwwer  it 

“Tliis,  I think,  could  be  Celia,”  .site  .said.  “You’re 
sure  it’s  all  right?” 

“By  me,  yes,”  said  Poirot.  “By  her  tilH(»,  I hope.” 

• Mrs.  Oliver  came  back  a few  luiiiutcs  later.  Celia 
Ravenscroft  was  with  her.  She  hail  a doubtful,  suspi- 
cious look. 

“I  don’t  know,"  she  said,  “if  I — ” She  stopped,  sett- 
ing at  Hercule  Pokot 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“I  want  to  introduce  you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “to 
someone  who  is  helping  me,  and  I hope  is  helping 
you  also.  That  is,  helping  you  in  what  you  want  to  know 
and  to  find  out.  This  is  Monsieur  Hercule  Poirot.  He 
has  special  genius  in  finding  out  things.” 

“Oh,”  said  Celia. 

She  looked  very  doubtfully  at  the  egg-shaped  head, 
the  monstrous  moustaches  and  the  small  stature. 

“I  think,”  she  said  rather  doubtfully,  “that  I have 
heard  of  him.” 

Hercule  Poirot  stopped  himself  with  a slight  effort 
from  saying  firmly,  “Most  people  have  heard  of  me.” 
It  was  not  quite  as  true  as  it  used  to  be,  because  many 
people  who  had  heard  of  Hercule  Poirot  and  known 
him  were  now  reposing  with  suitable  memorial  stones 
over  them  in  churchyards.  He  said: 

“Sit  down,  mademoiselle.  I will  tell  you  this  much 
about  myself.  That  when  I start  an  investigation  I pur- 
sue it  to  the  end.  I will  bring  to  light  the  truth  and  if  it 
is,  shall  we  say,  truly  the  truth  that  you  want,  then  I 
will  deliver  that  knowledge  to  you.  But  it  may  be  that 
you  want  reassuring.  That  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the 
truth.  I can  find  various  aspects  that  might  reassure  you. 
Will  that  be  enough?  If  so,  do  not  ask  for  more.” 

Celia  sat  down  in  the  chair  he  had  pushed  towards 
her,  and  looked  at  him  rather  earnestly.  Then  she  said; 

“You  don’t  think  I’d  care  for  ffie  truth,  is  that  it?” 

“I  think,”  said  Poirot,  “that  the  truth  might  be—a 
shock,  a sorrow,  and  it  might  be  that  you  would  have 
said  ‘why  did  I not  leave  ail  this  behind?  Why  did  I 
ask  for  knowledge?  It  is  painful  knowledge  about  which 
I can  do  nothing  helpful  or  hopeful.’  It  is  a double  sui- 
cide by  a father  and  a moflier  that  I-^well,  we’ll  admit 
it — that  I loved.  It  is  not  a disadvantage  to  love  a mother 
and  father.” 


157 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“It  seems  to  be  considered  so  nowadays  occasional- 
ly ” said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “New  article  of  belief,  shall  we 
say.” 

“That’s  the  way  I’ve  been  living,”  said  Celia.  “Be- 
ginning  to  wondef,  you  know.  Catching  on  to  odd  things 
that  people  said  sometimes.  People  who  looked  at  me 
rather  pityingly.  But  more  than  that.  With  curiosity  as 
well.  One  begins  to  find  out,  you  know,  things  about 
people,  I mean.  People  you  meet,  people  you  know,  peo- 
ple who  used  to  know  your  family.  I don’t  want  this  life, 
I want . . . you  think  I don’t  really  want  it,  but  I do-I 
want  truth.  I’m  able  to  deal  with  troth.  Just  tell  me 
something.” 

It  was  not  a continuation  of  the  conversation.  Celia 
had  turned  on  Poirot  with  a separate  question.  Som^ 
thing  which  had  replaced  what  had  been  in  her  mind 
just  previously. 

“You  saw  Desmond,  didn’t  you?”  she  said.  “He  went 
to  see  you.  He  told  me  he  had.” 

“Yes.  He  came  to  see  me.  Did  you  not  want  him  to 
do  so?” 

“He  didn’t  ask  me.” 

“If  he  had  asked  you?” 

“I  don’t  know.  I don’t  know  whether  I should  have 
forbidden  him  to  do  so,  told  him  on  no  account  to  do 
such  a thing,  or  whether  I should  have  encouraged  it.” 

“I  would  like  to  ask  you  one  que.stion,  mademoi- 
selle. I want  to  know  if  there  is  one  clear  thing  in  your 
mind  that  matters  to  you,  that  could  matter  to  you 
more  than  anything  disc.” 

“Well,  what  is  that?” 

“As  you  say,  Desmond  Burton-Cox  carac  to  see  me. 
A very  attractive  and  likeable  young  man,  and  very 
much  in  earnest  over  what  he  came  to  say.  Now  tot 
— ^that  is  the  really  important  thing.  The  important  thing 

158 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


is  if  you  and  he  really  wish  to  marry — ^because  that  is 
serious.  That  is — though  young  people  do  not  always 
think  so  nowadays — that  is  a link  together  for  life.  Do 
you  want  to  enter  into  that  state?  It  matters.  What  differ- 
ence can  it  make  to  you  or  to  Desmond  whether  the 
death  of  two  people  was  a double  suicide  or  something 
quite  different?” 

“You  think  it  is  something  quite  different — or,  it 
was?” 

“I  do  not  as  yet  know,”  said  Poirot.  “I  have  reason  to 
believe  that  it  might  be.  There  are  certain  things  that 
do  not  accord  with  a double  suicide,  but  as  far  as  I can 
go  on  the  opinion  of  the  police — and  the  police  are  very 
reliable.  Mademoiselle  Celia,  very  reliable — ^they  put 
together  all  the  evidence  and  they  thought  very  definite- 
ly that  it  could  be  nothing  else  but  a double  suicide.” 

“But  they  never  knew  the  cause  of  it?  That’s  what 
you  mean.” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “that’s  what  I mean.” 

“And  don’t  you  know  the  cause  of  it,  either?  I mean, 
from  looking  into  things  or  thinking  about  them,  or 
whatever  you  do?” 

“No,  I am  not  sure  about  it,”  said  Poirot.  “I  think 
there  might  be  something  very  painful  to  leam  and  I 
am  asking  you  whether  you  will  be  wise  enough  to  say: 
The  past  is  the  past.  Here  is  a young  man  whom  J 
care  for  and  who  cares  for  me.  This  is  the  future  we 
are  spending  together,  not  the  past.’” 

“Did  he  tell  you  he  was  an  adopted  child?”  asked 
Celia. 

“Yes,  he  did.” 

“You  see,  what  business  is  it  really,  of  hers?  Why 
should  she  come  worrying  Mrs.  Oliver  here,  trying  to 
make  Mrs.  Oliver  ask  me  questions,  find  put  things. 
She’s  not  his  own  mother.” 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Does  he  care  for  her?” 

“No  ” said  Celia.  “Fd  say  on  the  whole  he  dislikes 
her.  I think  he  always  has." 

“She’s  spent  money  on  him,  schooling  and  on  clothes 
and  on  all  sorts  of  different  things.  And  you  think  she 
cares  for  him?” 

“I  don’t  know.  I don’t  think  so.  She  wanted,  I sup- 
pose,  a child  to  replace  her  own  child.  She’d  had  a child 
who ’died  in  an  accident,  that  was  why  she  wanted  to 
adopt  someone,  and  her  husband  had  died  t|mtc  recent" 
ly.  All  these  dates  are  so  difficult.” 

“I  know,  I know.  I would  like  perhaps  to  know  one 
thing.’’ 

“About  her  or  about  him?” 

“Is  he  provided  for  financially?” 

“I  don’t  know  quite  what  you  mean  by  that.  He’ll  be 
able  to  support  me— to  support  a wife.  I gather  some 
money  was  settled  on  him  when  he  was  adopted.  A suf- 
ficient sum,  that  is,  I don’t  mean  a fortune  or  anything 
like  that.” 

“There  is  nothing  that  she  could— withhold?” 

“What,  you  mean  that  she’d  cut  (vlf  the  money  sup- 
plies if  he  married  me?  I don’t  think  .she’s  ever  threat- 
ened to  do  that,  or  indeed  that  she  could  do  it.  1 think  it 
was  all  fixed  up  by  lawyers  or  whiwver  arranges  adop- 
tions. I mean,  they  make  a lot  of  fuss,  the.se  adoption 
societies,  from  tdl  I hear.” 

“I  would  ask  you  something  else  which  you  might 
know  but  nobody  else  docs.  Presumably  Mrs.  Burton- 
Cox  knows  it  Do  you  know  who  his  actual  mote 
was?” 

“You  think  titat  might  have  been  one  of  the  reasons 
for  her  being  so  nwey  and  all  Utat?  Something  to  do 
with,  as  you  say,  what  be  was  really.  1 don’t  know,  I 
suppose  he  mi^t  have  been  uu  child. 

m 


ELEPHANTS  GAM  REMEMBER 

They’re  the  usual  ones  that  go  for  adoption,  aren’t 
they?  She  might  have  known  something  about  his  real 
mother  or  his  real  father,  or  something  like  that  K 
so,  she  didn’t  tell  him.  I gather  she  just  told  him  the  sil- 
ly things  they  suggest  you  should  say.  That  it  is  just  as 
nice  to  be  adopted,  because  it  shows  you  really  were 
wanted.  Tliere’s  a lot  of  silly  slop  like  that” 

“I  think  some  societies  suggest  that  that’s  the  way  you 
should  break  the  news.  Does  he  or  you  know  of  any 
blood  relations?” 

“I  don’t  know.  I don’t  think  he  knows,  but  I don’t 
think  it  worries  Mm  at  all.  He’s  not  that  kind  of  a 
worrier.” 

“Do  you  know  if  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  was  a friend  of 
your  family,  of  your  mother  and  father?  Did  you  ever 
meet  her,  as  far  as  you  can  remember,  when  you  were 
living  in  your  own  home  in  the  early  days?” 

“I  don’t  think  so.  I think  Desmond’s  mother — mean, 

I think  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  went  to  Malaya,  I think  per- 
haps her  husband  died  out  in  Malaya,  and  that  Des- 
mond was  sent  to  school  in  England  while  they  were 
out  there  and  that  he  was  boarded  with  some  cousins 
or  people  who  take  in  cMldren  for  holidays.  And  that’s 
how  we  came  to  be  friends  in  those  days.  I always  re- 
membered him,  you  know.  I was  a great  hero-worsMper. 
He  was  wonderful  at  climbing  trees  and  he  taught  me 
things  about  birds’  nests  and  feds’  eggs.  So  it  seemed 
quite  natural,  when  I met  him  again  I mean,  met  him 
at  the  university,  and  we  both  talked  about  where  we’d 
lived  and  tlien  he  asked  me  my  name.  He  said,  ‘Only 
your  Christian  name  I know,’  and  then  we  remembered 
quite  a lot  of  things  together.  It’s  what  made  us,  you 
might  say,  get  acquainted.  I don’t  know  everytMng 
about  him.  I don’t  know  anything.  I want  to  know.  How 
can  you  arrange  your  life  and  know  what  you’re  going 

161 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

to  do  with  your  life  if  you  don’t  know  a!!  about  the 
things  that  affect  you,  that  really  happened?” 

“So  you  tell  me  to  carry  on  with  my  investigation?” 

“Yes,  if  it’s  going  to  produce  any  lesults,  though  I 
don’t  think  it  will,  because  in  a way,  well,  Desmond 
and  I have  tried  our  hand  at  finding  out  a few  things. 
We  haven’t  been  very  successful.  It  seems  to  come  back 
to  this  plain  fact  which  isn  t really  the  st<.>iy  of  a life.  It’s 
the  story  of  a death,  isn’t  it?  Of  two  deaths,  that’s  to 
say  When  it’s  a double  suicide,  one  thinks  of  it  as  one 
death  Is  it  in  Shakespeare  or  where  docs  the  quotation 
come  from— ‘And  in  death  they  were  not  divided’?" 
She  turned  to  Poirot  again.  “Yes,  go  im.  tJo  on  finding 
out.  Go  on  telling  Mrs.  Oliver  or  Iclliu!',  me  direct.  I’d 
rather  you  told  me  direct.”  She  turned  towards  Mrs. 
Oliver.  “I  don’t  mean  to  be  horrid  to  you.  Godmother. 
You’ve  been  a very  nice  godmother  to  me  always,  but 
—but  I’d  like  it  straight  frt>m  tlie  horse’s  mouth.  I’m 
afraid  that’s  rather  rude,  Monsieur  Poirot,  but  1 didn’t 
mean  it  that  way.” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “I  am  content  to  be  the  horse’s 
mouth.” 

“And  you  think  you  will  be?” 

“I  always  believe  that  t can.” 

“And  it’s  always  true,  is  it?" 

“It  is  usually  true,"  said  Poirot.  “I  do  not  say  mote 
thandiat.” 


162 


13. 

MRS.  BURTON-COX 


“Well,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver  as  she  returned  into  the  room 
after  seeing  Celia  to  the  door.  “What  do  you  think  of 
her?” 

“She  is  a personality,”  said  Poirot,  “an  interesting 
girl.  Definitely,  if  I may  put  it  so,  she  is  somebody,  not 
anybody.” 

“Yes,  that’s  true  enough,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“1  would  like  you  to  tell  me  something.” 

“About  her?  I don’t  really  know  her  very  well.  One 
doesn’t  really,  with  godchildren.  I mean,  you  only  see 
them,  as  it  were,  at  stated  intervals  rather  far  apart.” 

“1  didn’t  mean  her.  Tell  me  about  her  mother.” 

“Oh.  1 see.” 

“You  knew  her  mother?” 


ELEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

“Yes.  We  were  in  a sort  of  pensitmtm  in  Paris  to- 
gether. People  used  to  send  girls  to  Paris  then  to  be 
finished,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “That  sound.s  more  like  an 
introduction  to  a cemetery  than  an  introduction  into  so- 
ciety. What  do  you  want  to  know  about  her?” 

“Yow  remember  her?  You  renieinber  what  she  was 
hke?” 

“Yes.  As  I leli  you,  one  doesn’t  entirely  forget  tilings 
or  people  because  they’re  in  the  past.” 

“What  impression  did  she  nwke  on  you?” 

“She  was  beautiful,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “1  do  remem- 
ber that.  Not  when  she  was  about  thirteen  or  fourteen,  , 
She  had  a lot  of  puppy  fat  then.  1 think  wc  all  did,”  she 
added  thoughtfully. 

“Was  she  a personality?” 

“It’s  difticult  to  remember  because,  you  see,  she 
wasn’t  ray  only  friend  or  my  grctde.st  friend.  I mean, 
there  were  several  of  us  together— a little  pack,  as  yon 
might  say.  People  with  tastes  more  or  less  the  same, 
We  were  keen  on  tennis  and  wc  were  keen  on  being  tak- 
en to  the  opera  and  we  were  bored  to  death  being  taken 
to  the  picture  galleries.  I really  can  only  give  you  a gen- 
eral idea.” 

“Molly  Preston-Grey.  That  was  her  name.  Had  few 
boy  Mends?” 

“We  had  one  or  two  passions.  I think.  Not  for  pop 
singers,  of  course.  They  hadn't  happened  yet.  Actors 
usually.  There  was  one  rather  fammi.s  vtiriely  actor.  A 
girl~onc  of  the  girls— had  him  pinned  up  over  her 
bed  and  Mademoiselle  Girand,  the  I'rench  mistress,  on 
no  account  allowed  that  actor  to  he  pinned  up  there. 
“Ce  ri'est  pas  cotivemble,'  she  sail!.  The  girl  tlidn’t  tell 
her  that  he  was  her  father!  We  laughed,”  added  hto. 
Oliver.  “Yes,  we  laughed  a good  deal." 

“Well,  tell  me  more  about  Molly  or  Margaret  Ptw- 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

ton-Grey.  Does  this  girl  remind  you  of  her?” 

“No,  I don’t  think  she  does.  No.  They  are  not 
I think  MoUy  was  more— was  more  emotional  than  this 
girl.” 

“There  was  a twin  sister,  I understand.  Was  she  at 

the  same  pensionnat?'^ 

“No,  she  wasn’t.  She  might  have  been  since  they  were 
the  same  age,  but  no,  I think  she  was  in  some  entirely 
different  place  in  England.  I’m  not  sure.  I have  a feel- 
ing that  the  twin  sister  Dolly,  whom  I had  met  once  or 
twice  very  occasionally  and  who  of  course  at  that  time 
looked  exactly  like  Molly— I mean  they  hadn’t  started 
trying  to  look  different,  have  different  hdir-dos  and  aU 
that,  as  twins  do  usually  when  they  grow  up.  I think 
Molly  was  devoted  to  her  sister  Dolly,  but  she  didn’t 
talk  about  her  very  much.  I have  a feeling— nowadays, 
I mean,  I didn’t  have  it  then — that  there  might  h&ve 
been  something  a bit  wrong  perhaps  with  the  sister  even 
then.  Once  or  twice,  I remember,  there  were  mentions 
of  her  having  been  ill  or  gone  away  for  a course  of 
treatment  somewhere.  Something  like  that.  I remember 
once  wondering  whether  she  was  a cripple.  She  was  tak- 
en once  by  an  aunt  on  a sea  voyage  to  do  her  health 
good.”  She  shook  her  head.  “I  can’t  really  remember, 
though.  I just  had  a feeling  that  Molly  was  devoted  to 
her  and  would  have  liked  to  have  protected  her  in 
some  way.  Does  that  seem  nonsense  to  you?” 

“Not  at  all,”  said  Hercule  Poirot. 

“'I’here  were  other  times,  I think,  when  she  didn’t 
want  to  talk  about  her.  She  talked  about  her  mother 
and  her  father.  She  was  fond  of  them,  I think,  in  the 
ordinary  sort  of  way.  Her  mother  came  once  to  Paris 
and  took  her  out,  I remember,  Nice  woman.  Not  very 
exciting  or  good-looking  or  anything.  Nice,  quiet, 
kindly,” 


165 


ELEPHANTS  BAM  REMEMBER 

“I  see.  So  you  have  oothing  to  help  us  there?  Boy 

friends?” 

“We  didn’t  have  so  many  boy  friends  then,”  said 
Mrs.  Oliver.  “It’s  not  like  nowadays  when  ifs  a matter 
of  course.  Later,  when  we  were  both  back  again  at 
home  we  more  or  less  drifted  apart.  1 think  Molly  went 
abroad  somewhere  with  her  parcirts.  I don’t  think  it 
was  India— I don’t  think  so.  Somewhere  else,  1 think  it 
was.  Egypt,  perhaps.  1 think  now  they  were  in  the 
Diplomatic  Service.  They  were  in  Sweden  at  one  time, 
and  after  that  somewhere  like  liermudu  or  the  West  • 
Indies.  I think  he  was  a governor  or  something  there, 
But  those  sort  of  tilings  one  doesn’t  really  remember. 
All  one  remembers  is  all  the  silly  things  that  we  smd  to 
each  other.  I had  a cro.sh  on  die  violin  ma.ster,  I re- 
member.  Molly  was  very  keen  on  the  music  master, 
which  was  very  satisfying  to  us  both  and  I should  think 
much  less  troublesome  than  boy  friends  seem  to  be 
nowadays.  I mean,  you  adorcil — longed  for  the  day 
when  they  came  again  to  teach  you.  'I'hey  were,  I have 
no  doubt,  quite  indilTcrcnt  to  you.  But  one  dreamt 
about  them  at  night  and  I remember  having  a splen- 
did  kind  of  daydream  in  which  I nursed  my  beloved 
Monsieur  Adolphe  when  he  had  cholera  and  I gave 
him,  I think,  blood  transfusions  to  save  his  lifc.*How 
very  silly  one  is.  And  think  of  all  the  other  things  yoa 
think  of  doing!  There  was  one  time  when  I was  quite 
determined  to  be  a mm  and  later  tm  I thonglit  I’d  be  a 
hospital  nurse.  Well,  I suppose  we  shall  have  Mrs, 
Burton-Cox  in  a moment.  I wonder  how  she  will  react 
to  you?” 

Poirot  gaxed  at  his  watch. 

“We  shall  be  able  to  sec  that  fairly  %mn” 

“Have  wo  anything  else  wc  ought  to  talk  aiioiit  first?" 

“I  tMnk  there  are  a few  things  wc  migiit  MS* 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


pare  notes  on.  As  I say,  there  are  one  or  two  things  that 
I think  could  do  with  investigation.  An  elephant  in- 
vestigation for  you,  shall  we  say?  And  an  understock 
for  an  elephant  for  me.” 

“What  an  extraordinary  thing  to  say,”  said  Mrs.  Oli- 
ver. “I  told  you  I was  done  with  elephants.” 

“Ah,”  said  Poirot,  “but  elephants  perhaps  have  not 
done  with  you.” 

The  front  doorbell  sounded  once  again.  Poirot  and 
Mrs.  Oliver  looked  at  each  other. 

“Well,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “here  we  go.” 

She  left  the  room  once  more.  Poirot  heard  sounds  of 
greeting  going  on  outside  and  in  a moment  or  two  Mrs. 
Oliver  returned,  ushering  the  somewhat  massive  figure 
of  Mrs.  Burton-Cox. 

“What  a delightful  flat  you  have,”  said  Mrs.  Burton- 
Cox.  “So  charming  of  you  to  have  spared  time — ^your 
very  valuable  time,  I’m  sure — and  asked  me  to  come 
and  see  you.”  Her  eyes  shot  sideways  to  Hercule  Poi- 
rot. A faint  expression  of  surprise  passed  over  her  face. 
For  a moment  her  eyes  went  from  him  to  the  baby 
grand  piano  that  stood  in  one  window.  It  occurred  to 
Mrs.  Oliver  that  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  was  thinking  that 
Hercule  Poirot  was  a piano  tuner.  She  hastened  to  dis- 
pel this  illusion. 

“I  want  to  introduce  you,”  she  said,  “to  Mr.  Hercule 
Poirot.” 

Poirot  came  forward  and  bent  over  her  hand. 

“I  think  he  is  tlie  only  person  who  might  be  able  to 
help  you  in  .some  way.  You  know.  What  you  were  ask- 
ing me  about  the  other  day  concerning  my  godchild, 
Celia  Ravcnscroft.” 

“Oh,  yes,  how  land  of  you  to  remember.  I do  so  hope 
you  can  give  mo  a litUe  more  knowledg®  what  really 
happened.” 


167 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


‘Tm  afraid  I haven’t  been  very  successful,” 

Mrs  Oliver,  “and  that  is  really  why  I asked  Mr,  Poirot 
to  meet  you.  He  is  a wonderful  person,  you  know,  for 
information  on  things  generally.  Really  on  top  of  his 
profession.  I cannot  tell  you  how  many  friends  of 
mine  he  has  assisted  and  how  many,  well,  1 can  reahy 
call  them  mysteries,  he  has  elucidated.  And  this  was 
such  a tragic  thing  to  have  happened. 

“Yes,  indeed,”  .said  Mrs.  hm  tm  Cox.  Her  eyes  were 
still  somewhat  doubtful.  Mrs.  Oliver  indicated  chairs 
and  remarked; 

“Now  what  will  you  have?  A glass  of  sherry?  It's 
too  late  for  tea,  of  course.  Or  would  you  lu-cfcr  a cock- 
tail  of  some  kind?” 

“Oh,  a glass  of  sherry.  You  are  wry  kind.” 

“Monsieur  Poirot?” 

“1,  too,”  said  Poirot. 

Mrs.  Oliver  could  not  help  being  thankful  that  he 
had  not  asked  for  Strop  tie  Cassis  or  one  of  his  favorite 
fruit  drinks.  She  got  out  gIu.sKcs  and  ti  liecantcr, 

“I  have  already  indicated  to  Monsieur  Poirot  the 
outlines  of  the  inquiry  you  want  to  make.” 

“Oh,  yc.s,”  said  Mrs.  Hurton-C-'ox. 

She  seemed  rather  doubtful  and  not  so  sure  of  her- 
self as  it  would  seem  she  was  in  tlic  natural  habit  of 
being. 

“These  young  people,"  she  said  to  Poirot,  “so  diffl- 


ELEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

least  about  the — antecedents  of  people.  You  know, 
what  their  families  are  like.  Oh,  of  course  I know  Celia’s 
a very  well-born  girl  and  aU  that,  but  there  was  this 
tragedy.  Mutual  suicide,  I believe,  but  nobody  has  been 
really  able  to  enlighten  me  at  all  on  what  led  to  it  or 
what  led  up  to  it,  shall  we  say.  I have  no  actual  friends 
who  were  friends  in  common  with  the  Ravenscrofts  and 
so  it  is  very  difficult  for  me  to  have  ideas.  I know  Celia 
is  a charming  girl  and  all  that,  but  one  would  Hke  to 
know,  to  know  more.” 

“I  understand  from  my  friend,  Mrs.  Oliver,  that  you 
wanted  to  know  something  specifically.  You  wanted  to 
know,  in  fact — ” 

“What  you  said  you  wanted  to  know,”  said  Mrs. 
Oliver,  chipping  in  with  some  firmness,  “was  whether 
Celia’s  father  shot  her  mother  and  then  himself  or 
whether  Celia’s  mother  shot  her  father  and  then  her- 
self.” 

“I  feel  it  makes  a difference,”  said  Mrs.  Burton-Cox. 
“Yes,  definitely  I feel  it  makes  a difference.” 

“A  very  interesting  point  of  view,”  said  Poirot. 

His  tone  was  not  very  encouraging. 

“Oh,  the  emotional  background,  shall  I say,  the  emo- 
tional events  that  led  up  to  aU  this.  In  a marriage,  you 
must  admit,  one  had  to  think  of  the  children.  The  chil- 
dren, 1 mean,  that  are  to  come.  I mean  heredity.  I 
think  now  we  realize  that  heredity  does  more  than  en- 
vironment. It  leads  to  certain  formation  of  character 
and  certain  very  grave  risks  that  one  might  not  want 
to  take.” 

“True,”  said  Poirot.  “The  people  who  undertake  the 
risks  are  tlic  ones  that  have  to  make  the  decision.  Your 
son  and  this  young  lady,  it  will  be  their  choice.” 

“Ohj  I know,  I know.  Not  mine.  Parents  are  never 
allowed  to  choose,  are  they,  or  even  to  give  any  advice. 

im 


ELEPHAMTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

But  I would  like  to  know  something  about  it.  Yes,  I 
would  like  to  know  very  much.  If  you  feel  that  you 
could  undertake  any— investigation  i suppose  is  the 
word  you  would  use.  But  perhaps— perhaps  i am  being 
a very  foolish  mother.  You  know.  Overanxious  about 
my  dear.son.  Mothers  arc  like  tluit. 

She  gave  a little  whinny  of  laughter,  putting  her  head 
slightly  on  one  side. 

“Perhaps,”  she  said,  as  she  tippeil  up  the  sherry  glass, 
“perhaps  you  will  think  abiuit  it  ami  1 also  will  let  you 
know.  Perhaps  the  exact  point.s  ami  tlungs  that  1 am 
worried  about.” 

She  looked  at  her  watch. 

“Oh,  dear.  Oh,  dear.  I’m  late  ftw  anotlier  appoint- 
ment. I shall  have  to  go.  I am  so  sorry,  dear  Mrs.  Olivet, 
to  have  to  run  away  so  soon,  but  you  know  what  it  is.  I 
had  great  difficulties  finding  a taxi  this  afternoon.  One 
after  another  just  turned  his  head  aside  and  drove 
straight  past  me.  Ah,  very,  very  dillicult,  isn’t  it?  I think 
Mrs.  Oliver  has  your  address,  hits  she  not?” 

“1  will  give  you  my  address,"  .said  Poirot.  He  re- 
moved a card  from  his  pewket  and  handed  it  to  her. 

“Oh,  ye.s,  yes.  I .see.  Monsieur  llcrcute  Poirot  Yon 
arc  French,  is  that  right?" 

“I  am  Belgian,”  said  Poirot. 

“Oh,  yes,  yes.  Belgique.  Yes,  yes.  I quite  under- 
stand. I am  so  plca.sed  to  have  met  y«m  and  I feci  so 
hopeful.  Oh,  dear,  I mu.xt  go  very,  very  fast." 

Shaking  Mrs.  Oliver  warmly  by  the  hand,  then  ex- 
tending the  .same  hand  to  Poirot,  she  left  the  nwni  and 
the  door  sounded  in  the  hall. 

“Well,  what  do  you  think  of  that?"  sail!  Mrs,  Olivet. 

“What  do  you?”  said  Poirot. 

“She  ran  away,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  "She  ran  away, 
You  frightened  te  in  ttome  way,” 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “1  think  you’ve  judged  quite 
right.” 

“She  wanted  me  to  get  things  out  of  Celia,  she  want- 
ed me  to  get  some  knowledge  out  of  Celia,  some  expres- 
sion, some  sort  of  secret  she  suspected  was  there,  but 
she  doesn’t  want  a real  proper  investigation,  does  she?” 

“I  think  not,”  said  Poirot.  “That  is  interesting.  Very 
interesting.  She  is  well-to-do,  you  think?” 

“I  should  say  so.  Her  clothes  are  expensive,  she  lives 
at  an  expensive  address,  she  is — it’s  difficult  to  make 
oat.  She’s  a pushing  woman  and  a bossy  woman.  She 
sits  on  a lot  of  committees.  There’s  nothing,  I mean, 
suspicious  about  her.  I’ve  asked  a few  people.  Nobody 
likes  her  very  much.  But  she’s  a sort  of  public-spirited 
woman  who  takes  part  in  politics,  all  those  sorts  of 
things.” 

“Then  what  is  wrong  with  her?”  said  Poirot.  i 

“You  think  there  is  something  wrong  with  her.  Or  do 
you  just  not  like  her,  like  I do?” 

“I  think  there  is  something  there  that  she  does  not 
want  to  come  to  light,”  said  Poirot. 

“Oh.  And  arc  you  going  to  find  out  what  it  is?” 

“Naturally,  if  1 can,”  said  Poirot.  “It  may  not  be  easy. 
She  is  in  retreat.  She  was  in  retreat  when  she  left  us 
here.  She  wa.s  afraid  of  what  questions  I was  going  to 
ask  her.  Yes,  It  is  interesting.”  He  sighed.  “One  will 
have  to  go  back,  you  know,  even  farther  than  one 
thought,” 

“What,  back  into  the  past  again?” 

“Yes.  Somewhere  in  the  past,  in  more  cases  than  one, 
there  is  something  that  one  wUI  have  to  know  before 
we  can  come  back  again  to  what  happened — what  is  it 
now?— -fifteen  years  ago,  twenty  years  ago,  at  a house 
called  Overciiffe.  Yes.  One  have  to  go  back 


ELEPHAHTS  0AH  REMEMBER 

“Well,  that’s  that,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “And  now,  what 
is  there  to  do?  What  is  this  list  of  yours?” 

“I  have  heard  a certain  amount  of  informatioii 
through  police  records  on  what  was  found  in  the  house, 
You  will  remember  that  among  the  things  there  were 
four  wigs.” 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “you  said  that  four  % 
were  too  many.” 

“It  seemed  to  be  a little  excessive,”  said  Poirot  “I 
have  also  got  certain  useful  addresses.  The  address  oi 
a doctor  that  might  be  helpful.” 

“The  doctor?  You  mean,  the  family  doctor?" 

“No,  not  the  family  doctor.  The  ilixior  who  gave  et^- 
dence  at  an  inquest  on  a child  who  met  with  an  acci- 
dent. Either  pushed  by  an  older  cliild  or  possibly  by 
someone  else.” 

“You  mean  by  the  mother?” 

“Possibly  the  mother,  possibly  by  someone  else  who 
was  in  the  house  at  the  time.  1 know  the  part  of  En- 
gland where  that  happened,  and  Superintendent  Garro- 
way  has  been  able,  through  sources  known  to  him  and 
also  through  journalistic  friends  of  mine,  who  were  in- 
terested in  thi.s  particular  ea.se.  to  get  some  information 
about  the  dtwtor.” 

“And  you’re  going  to  see  him.  He  must  be  a very  old 
man  by  now.” 

“It  is  not  him  I shall  go  to  .see.  It  is  his  son.  His  sonk 
als(»  qualified  m a specialist  in  various  fi»rms  of  mental 
disorders.  I have  an  Introduction  to  iiim  and  he  might 
be  able  to  tell  me  something  interesting.  There  have 
also  been  inquiries  into  a ca.se  of  inosicy.” 

“What  do  you  mean  by  mimey?” 

“Well,  there  are  certain  things  we  have  to  find  ont 
That  is  one  of  the  thinp  in  anything  wliich  might  he 
a aime.  Money.  Who  has  money  to  lose  by  some  hag- 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

pening,  who  has  money  to  gain  by  something  happen- 
ing. That,  one  has  to  find  out.” 

“Well,  they  must  have  found  out  in  the  case  of  the 
Ravenscrofts.” 

“Yes,  that  was  all  quite  natural,  it  seems.  They  had 
both  made  normal  wills  leaving,  in  each  case,  the  money 
to  the  other  partner.  The  wife  left  her  money  to  the  hus- 
band and  the  husband  left  his  money  to  his  wife.  Neither 
of  them  benefited  by  what  happened  because  they  both 
died.  So  that  the  people  who  did  profit  were  the  dau^- 
ter,  Celia,  and  a younger  child,  Edward,  who  I gather  is 
now  at  a university  abroad.”  ' 

“Well,  that  won’t  help.  Neither  of  the  children  were 
there  or  could  have  had  anything  to  do  with  it.” 

“Oh,  no,  that  is  quite  true.  One  must  go  further- 
further  back,  further  forward,  further  sideways,  to  find 
out  if  there  is  some  financial  motive  somewhere  that  is 
— ^well,  shall  we  say,  significant.” 

“Well,  don’t  ask  me  to  do  that  sort  of  thing,”  said 
Mrs.  Oliver.  “Fve  no  real  qualifications  for  that.  I 
mean,  that’s  come  up,  I suppose,  fairly  reasonably 
in  the — well,  in  the  elephants  that  I’ve  talked  to.” 

“No.  I think  the  best  thing  for  you  to  do  would  be 
to,  .shall  we  say,  take  on  the  subject  of  the  wigs.” 

“Wigs?” 

“There  had  been  a note  made  in  the  careful  police 
report  at  the  time  of  the  suppliers  of  the  wigs,  who  were 
a very  expensive  firm  of  hairdressers  and  wigmakers  in 
London,  in  Bond  Street.  Later,  that  particular  shop 
closed  and  the  business  was  transferred  somewhere 
else.  Two  of  the  original  partners  continued  to  run  it 
and  I understand  it  has  now  been  given  up,  but  I have 
here  an  address  of  one  of  the  principal  fitters  and  hair- 
dressers, and  I thought  periiaps  that  it  would  come 
more  easily  if  inquiries  were  made  by  a woman.” 

173 


ELEPHAHTS  CAH  REMEMBER 

“Ah,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “me?” 

“Yes,  you.” 

“All  right.  What  do  you  want  me  to  do?” 

“Pay  a visit  to  Cheltcnhatn  to  an  address  1 shall  give 
you  and  there  you  will  find  a Maiiamc  Roscntclle.  A 
woman  no  longer  young  but  who  was  a very  fashionable 
maker  of  ladies’  hair  adornnicuts  of  all^  kinds,  and  who 
was  married,  I understand,  to  .iuoiIht  in  the  same  pro* 
fession,  a hairdresser  who  spcciali/eil  in  surmounting 
the  problems  of  gcntlcnicn’.s  baldness.  Toupees  and 
other  things.” 

“Oh,  dear,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “the  jobs  you  do  give 
me  to  do.  Do  you  think  they’ll  rcmeinhcr  anything  about 
it?” 

“Elephants  remember.”  sail!  Hercule  Poirot. 

“Oh,  and  who  are  you  going  to  ask  questions  of? 
This  doctor  you  talked  about?” 

“For  one,  yes.” 

“And  what  do  you  tliink  he’ll  remember?” 

“Not  very  much.”  said  Poirot,  “fntt  it  seems  to  me 
possible  that  he  might  have  heard  about  a certain  acci- 
dent. It  must  have  been  an  interesting  case,  you  know. 
There  must  be  records  of  the  case  history.” 

“You  mean  of  the  twin  sister?" 

“Yes.  There  were  two  accidents  as  far  as  I can  heat 
connected  with  her.  One  when  .she  was  a young  mote 
living  in  the  country,  at  Hatters  (Jrecn  I tliink  the  ad- 
dres.s  wa.s,  and  again  later  when  she  was  in  India. 
Bach  time  an  accident  which  resulted  in  the  death  of 
a child.  I might  learn  something  iilKwf  — ” 

“You  mean  that  as  they  were  twin  sisters,  that  Molly 
—my  Molly,  I mean— might  also  haw  liad  mental  te 
ability  of  some  Und?  I don’t  believe  it  for  a minat& 
She  wasn’t  like  that  She  was  affectionate,  loving,  veiy 


174 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

good-looking,  emotional  and — oh,  she  was  a terribly 
nice  person.” 

“Yes.  Yes,  so  it  would  seem.  And  a happy  person 
on  the  whole,  would  you  say?” 

“Yes.  She  was  a happy  person.  A very  happy  person. 
Oh,  I know  I never  saw  anything  of  her  later  in  life, 
of  course;  she  was  living  abroad.  But  it  always  seemed 
to  me  on  the  very  rare  occasions  when  I got  a letter  or 
went  to  see  her  that  she  was  a happy  person.” 

“And  the  twin  sister  you  did  not  really  know?” 

“No.  Well,  1 think  she  was  . . . well,  quite  frankly 
she  was  in  an  institution  of  some  kind,  I think,  on  the 
rare  occasions  that  1 saw  Molly.  She  wasn’t  at  Molly’s 
wedding,  not  as  a bridesmaid  even.” 

“That  is  odd  in  itself.” 

“I  still  don’t  see  what  you’re  going  to  find  out  from 
that.” 

“Just  information,”  said  Poirot. 


175 


14. 

DR.  WILLOUGHBY 


Hercule  Poirot  got  out  of  the  taxi,  paid  the  fare  and  a 
tip,  verified  the  fact  Uiat  the  address  lie  had  come  to 
was  the  address  corresponding  to  tliat  written  down  in 
his  little  notebook,  took  carefully  a letter  from  his 
pocket  addressed  to  Dr.  Willoughby,  imnmtcd  the  steps 
to  the  house  and  pressed  tlie  bell.  The  tkxir  wiw  opened 
by  a manservant.  On  reception  of  Poimt's  mime  ho  was 
told  that  Dr.  Willoughby  was  expecting  him. 

He  was  shown  into  a small,  comfortable  rixim  with 
bookshelves  up  the  side  of  it.  'fhere  were  two  armchairs 
drawn  to  the  fire  and  a tray  with  glasses  on  it  and  two 
decantera.  Dr.  Willoughby  rme  to  greet  him.  He  wia  a 
man  between  fifty  smd  sixty  with  a lean,  thin  body,  a 
high  forehead,  dark-haired  and  with  very  piercing  gray 
eyes.  He  shook  hands  and  motioned  him  to  a seat.  Pd* 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

rot  produced  the  letter  from  his  pocket. 

“Ah,  yes.” 

The  doctor  took  it  from  him,  opened  it,  read  it  and 
then,  placing  it  beside  him,  looked  at  Poirot  with  some 
interest. 

“I  had  already  heard,”  he  said,  “from  Superintend- 
ent Garroway  and  also,  I may  say,  from  a friend  of  mine 
in  the  Home  Office,  who  also  begged  me  to  do  what  I 
can  for  you  in  the  matter  that  interests  you.” 

“It  is  a rather  serious  favor  to  ask,  I know,”  said  Poi- 
rot, “but  there  are  reasons  which  make  it  important  for 
me. 

“Important  for  you  after  this  number  of  years?” 

“Yes.  Of  course  I shall  quite  understand  if  those  par- 
ticular events  have  passed  out  of  your  mind  altogether.” 

“I  can’t  say  they’ve  done  that.  I am  interested,  as  you, 
may  have  heard,  in  special  branches  of  my  profes- 
sion, and  have  been  for  many  years.” 

“Your  father,  1 know,  was  a very  celebrated  authority 
on  them.” 

“Yes,  he  was.  It  was  a great  interest  in  his  life.  He 
had  a lot  of  theories,  some  of  them  triumphantly 
proved  right  and  some  of  them  which  proved  disap- 
pointing. It  is,  I gather,  a mental  case  you  are  interest- 
ed in?” 

“A  woman.  Her  name  was  Dorothea  Preston-Grey,” 

“Yes.  I was  quite  a young  man  at  the  time.  I was  al- 
ready interested  in  my  father’s  line  of  thought  al- 
though my  theories  and  his  did  not  always  agree.  The 
work  he  did  was  interesting  and  the  work  I did  in  col- 
laboration interested  me  very  much.  I don’t  know  what 
your  particular  interest  was  in  Dorothea  Preston-Grey, 
as  she  wa.s  at  the  time,  Mm.  Jarrow  later.” 

“She  was  one  of  twins,  I gather,”  said  PoiroL 

“Yes,  That  was  at  that  moment,  I may  say,  my  fa- 


177 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

ther’s  particular  field  of  study.  There  was  a project 
on  hand  at  that  time  to  follow  up  the  general  lives  of 
selected  pairs  of  identical  twins.  Those  who  were 
brought  up  in  the  same  environment,  those  who  through 
various  chances  of  life  were  brought  up  in  entirely  dif- 
ferent  environments.  To  .see  how  alike  they  remained, 
how  similar  the  things  were  that  happened  to  them, 
Two  sisters,  perhaps,  or  two  brothers  who  had  hardly 
spent  any  of  their  life  tt>gethcr  and  yet  in  an  extraor- 
(finary  way  the  same  things  seemed  to  Irappen  to  them 
at  the  same  time.  It  was  all—indectl  it  has  been  all- 
extreraely  interesting.  However,  that  is  not  your  interest 

I in  the  matter,  I gather.”  , . . , , 

’ “No”  said  Poirot,  “it  is  a case,  1 think — the  part  of 
it  that  is  to  say  that  I’m  interested  in-™of  an  accident  to 

a child.”  , 

“That  is  so.  It  was  in  Surrey,  I think.  Yes,  a very 

pleasant  area,  that,  in  wliich  people  livetl.  Not  very  far 
from  Camberley,  I think.  Mrs.  Jarrow  w;k  a young 
widow  at  that  time  and  she  imd  two  small  children.  Her 
husband  had  recently  died  in  an  accident.  She  was,  as 
a result — ” 

“Mentally  disturbed?"  a.sked  Poirot. 

“No,  she  was  not  thought  to  be  so.  Site  was  deeply 
shocked  by  her  husband's  death  and  had  a great  sense 
of  loss,  but  she  was  not  recovering  very  satisfactorily  in 
the  impression  of  her  own  dtKtor.  I iv  did  not  quite  like 
the  way  her  convalesecncc  was  tending,  and  she  did 
not  seem  to  be  getting  over  her  bereavement  in  the 
way  that  he  would  have  liked.  It  seemed  to  be  causing 
her  rather  peculiar  reactions.  Anyway,  he  wanted  a con* 
sultation  and  my  father  was  asked  by  iiim  to  tome  and 
SCO  what  he  could  make  of  it.  He  ftuin*!  liei  conditlw 
interesting,  and  at  the  same  time  he  ihongiit  it  held  very 
decided  dangers,  and  he  seemed  to  think  tiiat  it  wotdd 

i7S 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

be  as  well  if  she  was"  put  under  observation  in  some 
nursing  home  where  particular  care  could  be  taken. 
Things  like  that.  Even  more  so  after  the  case  when  this 
accident  to  the  child  happened.  There  were  two 
children,  and  according  to  Mrs.  Jarrow’s  account  of 
what  happened,  it  was  the  older  child,  a girl,  who  at- 
tacked the  little  boy  who  was  four  or  five  years  younger 
than  she  was,  hitting  him  with  a garden  spade  or  hoe, 
so  that  he  fell  into  an  ornamental  pond  they  had  in  the 
garden  and  was  drowned.  Well,  these  things,  as  you 
know,  happen  quite  often  among  children.  Children  are 
pushed  in  a perambulator  into  a pond  sometimes  be- 
cause an  older  child,  being  jealous,  thinks  that  ‘Mum- 
my will  have  so  much  less  trouble  jf  only  Edward  or 
Donald,  or  whatever  his  name  is,  wasn’t  here,’-  or,  ‘It 
would  be  much  nicer  for  her.’  It  all  results  from  jeal- 
ousy. There  did  not  seem  to  be  any  particular  case  or 
evidence  of  jealousy  in  this  case,  though.  The  child  had- 
not  resented  the  birth  of  her  brother.  On  the  other 
hand,  Mrs.  Jarrow  had  not  wanted  this  second  child. 
Although  her  husband  had  been  pleased  to  have  this 
second  child  coming,  Mrs.  Jarrow  did  not  want  it  She 
had  tried  two  doctors  with  the  idea  of  having  an  abor- 
tion, but  did  not  succeed  in  finding  one  who  would  per- 
form what  was  then  an  illegal  operation.  It  was  said  by 
one  of  the  servants,  and  also  by  a boy  who  was  bringing 
a telegram,  I believe,  to  the  house,  that  it  was  a wom- 
an who  attacked  the  boy,  not  the  other  child.  And  one 
of  the  servants  said  very  definitely  she  had  been  look- 
ing out  of  the  window  and  that  it  was  her  mistress.  She 
said,  ‘I  don’t  think  the  poor  thing  knows  what  she  is  do- 
ing nowadays.  You  know,  just  since  the  master  died 
she’s  been  in,  oh,  .such  a state 'as  mever  was.’  Well,  as  1 
say,  I don’t  know  exactly  what  you  want  to  know  about 
the  case.  A verdict  was  brought  in  of  accident.  It  was 


elephants  can  remember 

considered  to  be  an  accident,  and  the  children  had 
been  said  to  be  playing  together,  pushing  each  other,  et 
cetera  and  that  therefore  it  was  umloubtcdly  a very  un- 
fortunate accident.  It  was  left  at  that,  but  ray  father, 
when  consulted,  and  after  a conversation  with  Mrs. 
Jarrow  and  certain  teste,  questionnaires,  sympathetic  re- 
marks to  her  and  questions,  he  was  (piitc  sure  she  had 
been  responsible  for  what  happened.  According  to  Ms 
advice  it  would  be  advisable  tor  lier  to  htivc  mental 

treatment.”  , t t 1 1. 

“But  your  father  was  quite  sure  that  she  had  been  r^ 

^^“Yes'.^Thcre  was  a school  of  treatment  at  the  toe 
which  was  very  popular  and  which  niy  father  be- 
lieved in.  That  school’s  belief  was  that  after  sufficient 
treatment,  lasting  sometimes  quite  long  time,  a year 
or  longer,  people  could  resume  a normal  everyday  life, 
and  it  was  to  their  advantage  to  tio  so.  1 hey  could  be  re- 
turned to  live  at  home  and  with  a suit.sblc  amount  of 
attention,  both  medical  and  from  those,  usually  neat 
relatives,  who  were  with  them  and  could  observe 
them  living  a normal  life,  everything  would  go  well. 
This,  I may  say,  did  meet  with  success  at  first  in  many 
casei  but  later  there  was  a tlilfercnce.  Several  cases 
had  most  unfortunate  re.siilts.  Patients  who  Jippcaredto 
6 cured  came  home  to  their  natural  surioundmgs,  to  a 
imily,  a hu-sband,  their  mothers  and  fatficrs.  and  slowly 
relapsed,  so  that  very  often  tragedie.s  or  near-tragedies 
occurred.  One  case  my  father  was  bitterly  disappointed 

in also  a very  important  ease  in  his  knowledge— -was 

a woman  who  came  back  Ur  live  with  the  same  fri^dj 
she  lived  with  before.  Ail  seemed  to  be  going  happily,, 
but  after  about  five  or  six  months  she  sent  urgently  fci, 
a doctor  and  when  he  came  said,  *1  must  take  you  up- 
stairs  because  you  wiU  be  angry  at  what  I have  done,  andj 

IBO 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

you  will  have  to  send  for  the  police,  I am  afraid.  I 
know  that  must  happen.  But  you  see,  I was  commanded 
to  do  this.  1 saw  the  Devil  looking  out  of  Hilda’s  eyes.  I 
saw  the  Devil  there  so  I knew  what  I had  to  do.  I knew 
I had  to  kill  her.’  The  woman  was  lying  dead  in  a chair, 
strangled,  and  after  her  death  her  eyes  had  been  at- 
tacked. The  killer  died  in  a mental  home  with  never  any 
feeling  about  her  crime  except  that  it  had  been  a neces- 
sary command  laid  upon  her  because  it  was  her  duty  to 
destroy  the  Devil.” 

Poirot  shook  his  head  sadly. 

The  doctor  went  on:  “Yes.  Well,  I consider  that  in  a 
mild  way  Dorothea  Preston-Grey  suffered  from  a form 
of  mental  di.sorder  that  was  dangerous  and  that  she 
could  only  be  considered  safe  if  she  lived  under  super- 
vision. This  was  not  generally  accepted,  I may  say,  at 
the  time,  and  my  father  did  consider  it  most  inadvisable. 
After  she  had  been  committed  once  more  to  a very 
pleasant  nursing  home  a very  good  treatment  was  given. 
And  again,  after  a period  of  years  she  appeared  to  be 
completely  sane,  left  the  establishment,  lived  an  ordi- 
nary life  with  a very  pleasant  nurse  more  or  less  in 
charge  of  her,  though  considered  in  the  household  as  a 
lady’s  maid.  She  went  about,  made  friends  and  sooner 
or  later  went  abroad.” 

“To  India,”  said  Poirot 

“Yes.  I see  you’ve  been  correctly  informed.  She  went 
to  India  to  stay  with  her  twin  sister.” 

“And  there  another  tragedy  happened?” 

“Yes.  A child  of  a neighbor  was  attacked.  It  was 
thought  at  first  by  an  ayah,  and  afterwards  I believe  one 
of  the  native  servants,  a bearer,  was  suspected.  But 
there  again  there  seemed  no  doubt  that  Mrs,  Jarrow  had, 
for  one  of  those  mental  reasons  known  only  to  her, 
been  guilty  of  the  attack.  There  was  no  definite  evi- 

181 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

dence,  I understand,  which  could  be  brought  against 
her.  I think  General— I forget  his  name  now—” 

“Ravenscroft?”  said  Poirot. 

“Yes,  yes,  General  Ravenscroft  agreed  to  arrange 
for  her  to  go  back  to  England  and  again  undergo 
medical  treatment.  Is  that  what  you  wanted  to  know?” 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “that  is  what  1 have  partly  heard 
already,  but  mainly,  I may  .say,  by  hearsay,  which  is 
not  dependable.  What  I want  to  ask  you  was,  this  was  a 
case  concerned  with  identical  twins.  What  about  the 
other  twin?  Margaret  Prestou-Grey.  Afterwards  the 
wife  of  General  Ravenscroft.  Was  she  likely  to  be  af- 
fected by  the  same  malady?” 

“There  was  never  any  medical  case  about  her.  She 
was  perfectly  sane.  My  father  was  intcrc.stcd,  visited 
her  once  or  twice  and  talked  to  her  because  he  had  so 
often  seen  cases  of  almo.st  identical  illncs.scs  or  mental 
disturbances  happen  between  identical  twins  who  had 
started  life  very  devoted  to  each  other.” 

“Only  started  life,  you  said?” 

“Yes.  On  certain  tKcasions  a state  of  animosity  can 
arise  between  identical  twins.  It  ft>llows  on  a first  keen 
protective  love  one  for  the  other,  but  it  can  degenerate 
into  something  which  is  nearer  hatred,  if  thciu  is  some 
emotional  strain  that  could  trigger  it  off  or  could  arouse 
it,  or  any  emotional  crisis  to  account  for  animosity  aris- 
ing between  two  sisters. 

“1  think  there  might  have  been  that  here.  General 
Ravenscroft  as  a young  subaltern  or  captain  or  what- 
ever he  wa.s,  fell  deeply  in  love,  I think,  with  Dor- 
othea Prcstoii-Grey,  who  was  » very  hrautifiil  j'irl.  Ac- 
tually the  more  beautiful  of  Uic  two.  She  also  fell  in  love 
with  him.  They  were  not  officially  engaged,  but  Captain 
Ravenscroft  transferred  his  aflcctiorus  fairly  .soon  to  the 
other  sister,  Margaret — or  Molly,  as  she  wm  called.  He 

182 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

fell  in  love  with  her,  nnei  asked  her  to  marry  him.  She 
returned  his  affection  and  they  were  married  as  soon  as 
it  became  feasible  in  his  career.  My  father  had  no  doubt 
that  the  other  twin,  Dolly,  was  bitterly  jealous  of  her  sis- 
ters marriage  and  that  she  continued  to  be  in  love  with 
Alistair  Ravenscroft  and  to  resent  his  marriage.  How- 
ever, she  got  over  it  all,  married  another  man  in  due 
course— a thoroughly  happy  marriage,  it  seemed,  and 
later  she  used  frequently  to  go  to  visit  the  Ravenscrofts, 
not  only  on  that  one  occasion  m Adalaya,  but  later 
when  they  were  in  another  station  abroad  and  after  they 
returned  home.  She  was  by  that  time  apparently  cured 
again,  was  no  longer  in  any  kind  of  mental  dejection  and 
lived  with  a very  reliable  nurse-companion  and  staff  of 
servants.  I believe,  or  so  my  father  had  always  told  me, 
that  Lady  Ravenscroft,  Molly,  remained  very  devoted 
to  her  sister.  She  felt  very  protective  towards  her  and 
loved  her  dearly.  She  wanted  often,  I think,  to  see  more 
of  her  than  she  did,  but  General  Ravenscroft  was  not 
so  keen  on  her  doing  so.  I think  it  possible  that  the 
slightly  unbalanced  Dolly—Mrs.  Jarrow— continued  to 
feel  a very  strong  attachment  to  General  Ravenscroft, 
which  I think  may  have  been  embarrassing  and  dif- 
ficult for  him,  though  J believe  that  his  wife  was  quite 
convinced  that  her  sister  had  got  over  any  feelings  of 
jealousy  or  anger.” 

“I  understand  Mrs.  Jarrow  was  staying  with  the  Ra- 
venscrofts about  three  weeks  or  so  before  the  tragedy  of 
their  suicide  happened.” 

“Yes,  that  was  quite  true.  Her  own  tragic  death  hap- 
pened then.  She  was  quite  frequently  a sleepwalker.  She 
went  out  one  night  walking  in  her  sleep  and  had  an  ac- 
cident, falling  down  a portion  of  the  cliff  to  which  a 
pathway  which  had  been  discarded  appeared  to  lead. 
She  was  found  the  uejct  day  and  I believe  died  in  hos- 


183 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

pital  without  recovering  consciousness.  Her  sister  Molly 
was  extremely  upset  and  bitterly  unhappy  about  this, 
but  I would  like  to  say,  which  you  probably  want  to 
know,  I do  not  think  that  this  can  in  any  way  be  held 
responsible  for  the  subsequent  suicide  of  the  married 
couple  who  were  living  so  happily  together.  Grief  for  a 
sister’s  or  a sister-in-law’s  death  would  hardly  lead  you 
to  commit  smeide.  Certainly  not  to  a double  suicide.” 

“Unless,  perhaps,”  said  Hcrculc  Poirot,  “Margaret 
Ravenscroft  had  been  responsible  for  her  sister’s  death.” 

“Good  heavens!”  said  Dr.  Willoughby,  “surely  you 
are  not  suggesting—-” 

‘That  it  was  Margaret  who  followed  her  sleepwalk- 
ing sister,  and  that  it  was  Margarct’.s  hand  that  was 
stretched  out  to  push  Dorothea  over  tlic  cliff  edge?” 

“I  refuse  absolutely,”  said  Dr.  Willoughby,  to  ac- 
cept any  such  idea.” 

“With  people,”  said  Hcrculc  Poirot,  “one  never 
knows.” 


184 


15. 

EUGENE  AND  ROSENTELLE, 
HAIR  STYLISTS  AND  BEAUTICIANS 


Mrs.  Oliver  looked  at  Cheltenham  with  approval.  As  it 
, happened,  she  had  never  been  to  Cheltenham  before. 
How  nice,  said  Mrs.  Oliver' to  herself,  to  see  some 
houses  that  are  really  like  houses,  proper  houses. 

Casting  her  mind  back  to  youthful  days,  she  remem- 
bered that  she  had  known  people,  or  at  least  her  rela- 
tions, her  aunts,  had  known  people  who  lived  at  Chel- 
tenham. Retired  people  usually.  Army  or  Navy.  It  was 
the  sort  of  place,  she  thought,  where  one  would  like  to 
come  and  live  if  one  had  spent  a good  deal  of  time 
abroad.  It  had  a feeling  of  English  security,  good  taste 
and  pleasant  chat  and  conversation. 

After  looking  in  one  or  two  agreeable  antique  shops, 
she  found  her  way  to  where  she  wanted— or  rather  Her- 
cule  Poirot  wanted  her — ^to  go.  It  was  called  The  Rose 


185 


ELEPHAKTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Green  Hairdressing  Saloons.  She  walked  inside  it 
looked  round.  Four  or  five  people  were  in  process  of 
having  things  done  to  their  hair.  A plump  young  lady 
left  her  client  and  came  forward  witli  an  iiKpiiring  air. 

“Mrs.  Rosentellc?"  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  glancing  down 
at  a card.  “I  understand  she  said  she  could  see  me  if  I 
ramft  here  this  morning.  I don’t  mean,”  .she  added, 
“having  anything  done  to  my  hair,  but  I wanted  to 
consult  her  about  something  and  1 believe  a telephone 
call  was  made  and  she  said  if  J came  at  half-past 
eleven  she  could  spare  me  a short  time.” 

“Oh,  yes,”  said  the  girl  “1  think  Madam  is  expect- 
ing someone.” 

She  led  the  way  through  a passage  down  a .short  flight 
of  steps  and  pushed  a .swing  <loor  at  the  boitom  of  it 
From  the  hairdressing  saloon  they  Inul  passeii  into  what 
was  obvionsly  Mre.  Ro.scntcIlc’s  hoii.se.  'Ihe  plump  girl 
knocked  at  the  door  and  said,  “ I'he  lady  to  see  you,” 
as  she  put  her  nose  in,  and  then  askeii  rather  nervously, 
‘“What  name  did  you  say’.''” 

“Mrs.  Oliver,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

She  walked  in.  It  had  a faint  elfect  of  what  might 
have  been  yet  another  .showroom.  There  were  curtains 
of  rose  gauze  and  ro.scs  cm  the  wallpaper  and  Mrs. 
Roscntclle,  a woman  Mrs.  Oliver  thought  of  us  roughly 
her  own  age  or  possibly  a good  many  years  older,  was 
just  finishing  what  was  obviously  a cup  of  morning  cof- 
fee. 

“Mrs.  Roscntclle?"  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“Yes?” 

“You  did  expect  me?" 

'.‘Oh,  yes,  I didn’t  quite  understand  what  it  w,as  all 
about.  The  lines  are  so  bad  on  the  telephone.  That  is 
quite  all  right  I have  about  half  an  hour  to  spare. 

186 


ElEPHANTS  CAM  REMEMBER 

Would  you  Mke  some  coffee?” 

“No,  thank  you,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  won’t  keep 
you  any  longer  than  I need.  It  is  just  something  that  I 
want  to  ask  you  about,  that  you  may  happen  to  remem- 
ber. You  have  had  quite  a long  career,  I understand, ' 
in  the  hairdressing  business.” 

“Oh,  yes.  Fm  quite  thankful  to  gve  over  to  the  girls 
now.  I don’t  do  anything  myself  these  days.” 

“Perhaps  you  still  advise  people?” 

“Yes,  I do  do  that.”  Mrs.  Rosentelle  smiled. 

She  had  a nice,  intelligent  face  with  well-arranged 
brown  htur  with  somewhat  interesting  gray  streaks  in  it 
here  and  there. 

“Fm  not  sure  what  it’s  all  about.” 

“Well,  really,  I wanted  to  ask  you  a question  about, 
well,  I suppose  in  a way  about  wigs  generally.” 

“We  don’t  do  as  much  in  wigs  now  as  we  used  to  do.” 

“You  had  a business  in  London,  didn’t  you?” 

“Yes.  First  in  Bond  Street  and  then  we  moved  to 
Sloane  Street,  but  it’s  very  nice  to  live  in  the  country 
after  all  that,  you  know.  Oh,  yes,  my  husband  and  I 
are  very  satisfied  here.  We  run  a small  business,  but 
we  don’t  do  much  in  the  wig  line  nowadays,”  she  said, 
“though  my  husband  does  advise  and  get  wigs  designed 
for  men  who  are  bald.  It  really  makes  a big  difference, 
you  know,  to  many  people  in  their  business  if  they 
don’t  look  too  old  and  it  often  helps  in  getting  a job.” 

“I  can  quite  imagine  that,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver. 

From  sheer  nervousness  she  said  a few  more  things 
in  the  way  of  ordinary  chat  and  wondered  how  she 
would  start  on  her  subject.  She  was  startled  when  Mrs. 
Rosentelle  leaned  forward  and  said  suddenly,  “You 
are  Ariadne  Oliver,  aren’t  you?  The  novel  writer?” 

“Yes,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “as  a matter  of  fact—” 


187 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

she  had  her  usual  somewhat  shame  hiccd  expression 
when  she  said  this,  that  was  habitual  to  her— “yes,  I do 
write  novels.” 

“I’m  so  fond  of  your  books.  I’ve  read  a lot  of  them. 
Oh,  this  is  very  mce  indeed.  Now  tell  me  in  what  way 
can  I help  you?” 

“Well,  I wanted  to  talk  about  wigs  and  about  some- 
thing that  happened  a great  many  years  ago  and  prob- 
ably  you  mayn’t  remember  anything  about  it.’’ 

“WeU,  I rather  wonder — do  you  mean  fa.shions  of 
years  ago?” 

“Not  exactly.  It’s  a woman,  a frieml  of  mine— actual- 
ly I was  at  school  with  her — and  then  she  married  and 
went  out  to  India  and  came  back  to  lingland,  and  there 
was  a tragedy  later  and  one  of  die  things  I think  that 
people  found  suipri.sing  after  it  was  tlmt  she  had  so 
many  wigs.  I think  they  had  been  all  supplied  by  you, 
by  your  firm,  I mean.” 

“Oh,  a tragedy.  What  was  her  name?” 

“Well,  her  name  when  I knew  her  was  Preston-Grey, 
but  afterwards  her  name  was  Ravcn.serort.” 

“Oh.  Oh,  yes,  that  one.  Yes,  I do  remember  Lady 
Raveiiscroft.  I remember  her  quite  well.  She  was  so 
nice  and  really »vcry,  very  good-looking  still.  Yes,  her 
husband  was  a colonel  or  a general  or  .something  and 
‘hey’d  retired  and  they  lived  in— I forget  the  county 

ow — ” 

“And  there  was  what  wt»  supptwed  to  be  a double 
suicide,”  said  Mrs,  Oliver. 

“Yes.  Yes,  I remember  reading  about  it  uiul  saying, 
‘Why,  that’s  our  Lady  Ravenscroft,*  and  then  there  was 
a picture  of  them  both  in  die  paper,  and  I saw  that  it 
was  so.  Of  course,  I'd  never  seen  hitn,  but  it  was  her 
all  right.  It  secmol  80  sad,  so  much  grief.  1 heard  that 
they  discovered  that  she  had  cancer  and  they  couldn't  do 

188 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

anything  about  it  so  this  happened.  But  I never  heard 
any  details  or  anything.” 

“No,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  ‘ 

“But  what  is  it  you  think  I can  tell  you?” 

“You  supplied  her  with  wigs  and  I understand  the 
people  investigating,  I suppose  the  police,  thought  four 
wigs  was  quite  a lot  to  have,  but  perhaps  people  did 
have  four  wigs  at  a time?” 

“Well,  I think  that  most  people  had  two  wigs  at  least,” 
said  Mrs.  Rosentelle.  “You  know,  one  to  send  back  to 
be  serviced,  as  you  might  say,  and  the  other  one  that 
they  wore  while  it  was  away.” 

“Do  you  remember  Lady  Ravenscroft  ordering  an 
extra  two  wigs?” 

“She  didn’t  come  herself.  I think  she’d  been  or  was 
ill  in  hospital,  or  something,  and  it  was  a French  young 
lady  who  came.  I think  a French  lady  who  was  com- 
panion to  her  or  something  like  that.  Very  nice.  Spoke 
perfect  English.  And  she  explained  all  about  the  extra 
wigs  she  wanted,  sizes  and  colors  and  styles  and  ordered 
them.  Yes.  Fancy  my  remembering  it.  I suppose  I 
wouldn’t  have  except  that  about — oh,  it  must  have  been 
a month  later— a month,  perhaps,  more,  six  weeks— I 
read  about  the  suicide  you  know.  I’m  afraid  they  gave 
her  bad  news  at  the  hospital  or  wherever  she  was,  and 
so  she  just  couldn’t  face  living  any  more,  and  her  hus- 
band felt  he  couldn’t  face  life  without  her — ” 

Mrs,  Oliver  shook  her  head  sadly  and  continued  her 
inquiries. 

“They  were  different  kinds  of  wigs,  I suppose.” 

“Yes,  one  had  a very  pretty  gray  streak  in  it,  and  then 
tliere  was  a party  one  and  one  for  evening  wear,  and 
one  close-cropped  with  curls.  Very  nice,  that  you  could 
wear  under  a hat  and  it  didn’t  get  messed  up.  I was 
sorry  not  to  have  seen  Lady  Ravenscroft  again.  Even 


189 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

apart  from  her  illness,  she  had  been  veij  unhappy 
about  a sister  who  had  recently  died.  A twin  sister.” 
“Yes,  twins  are  very  devoted,  aren’t  tliey?”  said  Mrs. 

Oliver. 

“She’d  always  seemed  such  a happy  woman  before,” 
said  Mrs.  Rosentelle. 

Both  women  sighed.  Mrs.  Oliver  cliunjteil  tlie  subject. 
“Do  you  think  that  I’d  find  a wig  useful?”  she_ asked. 
The  expert  stretched  out  a hand  and  laid  it  specu- 
latively on  Mrs.  Oliver's  head. 

“I  wouldn’t  advise  it—yoii’ve  pot  a splendid  crop  of 

hair— very  thick  still.  I imagine” a faint  smile  came  to 

her  lips— “you  enjoy  doing  things  with  it?” 

“How  clever  of  you  to  know  that.  It’s  quite  true 

enjoy  experimenting.  It’s  such  tun.” 

“You  enjoy  life  altogether,  don’t  you?" 

“Yes,  I do.  1 suppose  it's  the  feeling  that  one  never 
knows  what  might  be  going  to  happen  next.” 

“Yet  that  feeling*”  said  Mrs.  Rosentelle,  "is  just  what 
makes  so  many  people  never  stop  worrying!” 


190 


16. 

MR.  GOBY  REPORTS 


Mr.  Goby  came  into  the  room  and  sat,  as  indicated  by 
Poirot,  in  his  usual  chair.  He  glanced  around  him  be- 
fore choosing  what  particular  piece  of  furniture  or  part 
of  the  room  he  was  about  to  address.  He  settled,  as 
often  before,  for  the  electric  fire,  not  turned  on  at  this 
time  of  year.  Mr.  Goby  had  never  been  known  to  ad- 
dress the  human  being  he  was  working  for  directly.  He 
selected  always  the  cornice,  a radiator,  a television  set, 
a clock,  sometimes  a carpet  or  a mat.  Out  of  a briefcase 
he  took  a few  papers. 

“Well,”  said  Hercule  Poirot,  “you  have  something 
for  me?”  , 

“I  liave  collected  various  details,”  said  Mr.  Goby. 

Mr.  Goby  was  celebrated  all  over  London,  indeed 

191 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

possibly  all  over  England  and  even  further,  as  a great 
purveyor  of  information.  How  he  performed  these  mir- 
acles, nobody  ever  really  quite  knew.  He  employed  a 
not  excessive  staff.  Sometimes  he  complained  that  his 
legs,  as  he  sometimes  called  them,  were  not  as  good  as 
they  used  to  be.  But  his  results  were  still  able  to  astonish 
people  who  had  commissioned  them. 

“Mrs.  Burton-Cox,”  he  said,  announcing  the  name 
much  as  though  he  had  been  the  hscal  churchwarden 
having  his  turn  at  reading  the  lessons.  He  might  equal- 
ly have  been  saying,  “Third  verse,  fourth  chapter,  the 
book  of  Isaiah.” 

“Mrs.  Burton-Cox,”  he  said  again.  “Married  Mr. 
Cecil  Aldbury,  manufacturer  of  butttms  on  a large  scale. 
Rich  man.  Entered  politics,  was  MP  for  Little  Stans- 
mere.  Mr.  Cecil  Aldbury  was  killed  in  a car  accident 
four  years  after  their  marriage.  The  only  child  of  the 
marriage  died  in  an  accident  .sliortiy  afterwards.  Mr. 
Aldbury’s  estate  was  inherited  by  in.s  wife,  but  was 
not  as  much  as  had  been  cxpecteii,  since  the  firm  had 
not  been  doing  well  of  late  years.  Mr.  Aldbury  also 
left  quite  a considerable  sum  of  money  to  a Mi.ss  Kath- 
leen Fenn,  with  whom  it  seemed  he  had  been  having, 
intimate  relations  quite  unknown  to  his  wife.  Mrs.  Bur- 
ton-Cox continued  her  political  career.  Some  three 
years  after  that  she  adopted  a chikl  which  had  been 
bom  to  Miss  Kathleen  Fenn.  Miss  Kathleen  Fenn  in- 
sisted that  the  child  was  the  son  of  the  late  Mr.  Ald- 
bury. This,  from  what  I have  bcert  able  to  learn  in  my 
inquiries,  is  somewhat  difficult  to  accept,”  continued 
Mr.  Goby.  “Miss  Fenn  had  had  many  relationships, 
usually  with  gentlemen  of  ample  menns  and  generous 
dispositions,  bat  after  all,  so  many  people  iiavc  their 
price,  have  they  not?  I’m  afraid  this  « quite  a serious 
biUI  may  have  to  send  you  in.” 

m 


ELEPHAHTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Continue,”  said  Hercule  Poirot. 

“Mrs.  Aldbury,  as  she  then  was,  agreed  to  adopt  the 
child.  A short  while  later  she  married  Major  Burton- 
Cox.  Miss  Kathleen  Fenn  became,  I may  say,  a 
most  successful  actress  and  pop  singer  and  made  a very 
large  amount  of  money.  She  then  wrote  to  Mrs.  Burton- 
Cox,  saying  she  would  be  willing  to  take  back  the  adopt- 
ed child  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  refused.  Mrs.  Burton-Cox 
has  been  living  quite  comfortably  since,  I understand. 
Major  Burton-Cox  was  killed  in  Malaya.  He  left  her 
moderately  well  off.  A further  piece  of  information  I 
have  obtained  is  that  Miss  Kathleen  Fenn,  who  died  a 
very  short  while  ago — eighteen  months,  I think — ^left 
a will  by  which  her  entire  fortune,  which  amounted  by 
then  to  a considerable  sum  of  money,  was  left  to  her 
natural  son  Desmond,  at  present  known  under  the  name 
of  Desmond  Burton-Cox.” 

“Very  generous,”  said  Poirot.  “Of  what  did  Miss 
Fenn  die?” 

“My  informant  tells  me  that  she  contracted  leukemia.” 

“And  the  boy  has  inherited  his  mother’s  money?” 

“It  was  left  in  trust  for  him  to  acquire  at  the  age  of 
twenty-five.”  • 

“So  he  will  be  independent,  will  have  a substantial 
fortune?  And  Mrs.  Burton-Cox?” 

“Has  not  been  happy  in  her  investments,  it  is  under- 
stood. She  has  sufiicient  to  live  on  but  not  much  more.” 

“Has  the  boy  Desmond  made  a will?”  asked  Poirot. 

“That,”  said  Mr.  Goby,  “I  fear  I do  not  know  as  yet. 
But  I have  certain  means  of  finding  out.  If  I do,  I will 
acquaint  you  with  the  fact  without  loss  of  time.” 

Mr.  Goby  took  his  leave,  absent-mindedly,  bowing  a 
farewell  to  the  electric  fire. 

About  an  hour  and  a half  later  the  telephone  rang. 

Hcrcule  Poirot,  with  a sheet  of  paper  in  front  of  him. 


193 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

was  making  notes.  Now  and  then  he  frowned,  twirled 
Ms  moustaches,  crossed  something  out  and  rewrote  it 
and  then  proceeded  onward.  When  the  telephone  rang, 
he  picked  up  the  receiver  and  listened. 

“Thank  you,”'  he  said;  “that  was  quick  work.  Yes 
. . . yes,  I’m  grateful.  I really  do  not  know  sometimes 
how  you  manage  these  things  ...  Yes,  that  sets  out  flie 
position  clearly.  It  makes  sense  of  something  that  did 
not  make  sense  before . , . Yes  . . . I gather . . . yes,  I’m 
listening  ...  you  arc  pretty  sure  that  that  is  the  case. 
He  knows  he  is  adopted  . . . but  he  never  has  been  told 
who  his  real  mother  was  . . . yes.  Yes,  1 see  . . . Very 
well.  You  will  clear  up  the  other  point,  too?  Thank  you.” 

He  replaced  the  receiver  and  started  once  more  writ- 
ing down  words.  In  half  an  hour  tlte  telephone  rang 
once  more.  Once  again  he  picked  up  the  phone. 

“Fm  back  from  Cheltenham,”  s;iid  a voice  which 
Poirot  had  no  dilliculty  in  reciigni'/ing. 

“Ah,  chSre  madame,  you  liavc  returned?  You  have 
seen  Mrs.  Rosentelle?” 

“Yes.  She  is  nice.  Very  nice.  And  you  were  qmte 
right,  you  know.  She  is  another  elephant.” 

“Meaning,  chke  madame?" 

“I  mean  that  she  remembered  Molly  Ruvenscroft” 

“And  she  remembered  her  wig.s?” 

“Yes.” 

Briefly  she  outlined  wftat  the  retired  h;iirdrc.sser  had 
told  her  about  the  wigjt. 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  "that  agrees.  That  is  exactly 
vhat  Superintendent  Garroway  nientiemed  to  me.  The 
bur  wigs  that  the  police  found.  Curbs,  an  evening  type 
of  headdress,  and  two  odier  plainer  ones.  Four,” 

“St)  I really  only  told  you  what  you  kttew  already?” 

“No,  you  told  me  something  more  than  that.  She  srid 
— ^fliat  is  what  you  told  me  just  nt)W,  b it  not?— diat 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Lady  Ravenscroft  wanted  two  extra  wigs  to  add  to  the 
two  that  she  already  had  and  that  this  was  about  three 
weeks  to  six  weeks  before  the  suicide  tragedy  occurred. 
Yes,  that  is  interesting,  is  it  not?” 

“It’s,  very  natural,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “I  mean,  you 
know  that  people,  women,  I mean,  may  do  awful  dam- 
age to  things.  To  false  hair  and  things  of  that  kind.  If  it 
can’t  be  redressed  and  cleaned,  if  it’s  got  burnt  or  got 
stuff  spilt  on  it  you  can’t  get  out,  or  it’s  been  dyed  and 
dyed  all  wrong — something  like  that — well  then,  of 
course  you  have  to  get  two  new  wigs  .or  switches  or 
whatever  they  arc.  I don’t  see  what  makes  you  excited 
about  that.” 

“Not  exactly  excited,”  said  Poirot,  “no.  It  is  a point, 
but  the  more  interesting  point  is  what  you  have  just 
added.  It  was  a French  lady,  was  it  not,  who  brought 
the  wigs  to  be  copied  or  matched?” 

“Yes.  I gathered  some  kind  of  companion  or  some- 
thing. Lady  Ravenscroft  had  been  or  was  in  hospital 
or  in  a nursing  home  somewhere  and  she  was  not  in 
good  health  and  she  could  not  come  herself  to  make  a 
choice  or  anything  of  that  kind.” 

“I  see.” 

“And  so  her  French  companion  came.” 

“Do  you  know  the  name  of  that  companion,  by 
any  chance?” 

“No.  I don’t  think  Mrs.  Rosentelle  mentioned  it.  In- 
fact I don’t  think  .she  knew.  The  appointment  was  made 
by  Lady  Ravenscroft  and  the  French  girl  or  woman  Just 
brouglit  the  wigs  along  for  size  and  matching^  and  all 
the  rest  of  it,  I suppose.”  •» 

“Weil,”  said  Poirot,  “that  helps  me  towards  the  fur- 
flicr  step  that  I am  about  to  take.” 

“What  have  you  learned?”  said  Mrs.  Oliver.  “Have 
you  done  any  tiling?” 


195 


eephahts  can  remember 

“You  are  always  so  skeptical,”  sakl  Poirot.  “Yoa  al- 
ways consider  that  I do  nothing,  that  1 sit  in  a chair 
and  repose  myself.” 

“Well,  I think  you  sit  in  a chair  and  think,”  admitted 
Mrs.  Oliver,  “but  I quite  agree  that  you  don’t  often  go 
out  and  do  things.” 

“In  the  near  future  I think  I may  possibly  go  out  and 
do  things,”  said  Hercuk*  Poirot,  “and  that  will  please 
you.  I may  even  cross  the  C’hatmcl,  though  certainly 
not  in  a boat.  A plane, ! think,  is  indicated.” 

“Oh,”  said  Mrs,  Oliver.  “Do  you  want  me  to  come, 

too?” 

“No,"  said  Poirot,  “I  think  it  would  be  better  if  I 
went  alone  on  this  occasion." 

“You  really  will  go?" 

“Oh,  yes,  oh,  yc.s.  1 will  run  about  with  all  activity 
and  so  you  should  be  plcascii  with  me,  inatlame.” 

When  he  had  rung  ofT.  he  liialcd  another  number 
which  he  looked  up  fnnn  a note  he  had  made  in  his 
pocketbook.  Presently  he  was  connected  to  the  person 
whom  he  wished  to  sircuk  t«>. 

“My  dear  Superintemient  (larroway,  it  is  Hercule 
Poirot  who  addresses  yt»u.  I tio  i»ot  tlcrangc  you  too 
much?  You  are  not  very  busy  at  this  moment?” 

“No,  I am  m»t  busy,”  sak!  Supeiintcndeut  <iarroway. 
“I  am  pruning  nry  roses,  that’s  all.” 

“There  is  sorncltung  that  I want  to  ask  ytni.  Quito  a 
small  thing.” 

“About  our  problem  of  the  double  suicide?" 

“Yc^  about  our  problem.  You  sait!  tticre  was  a dog 
in  the  house.  You  said  that  the  liog  went  for  walks  widi 
the  family,  or  so  you  undCRttwHl." 

“Yes,  there  was  some  mention  ituide  i>f  a dog.  I thii^ 
it  *^ay  tove  been  either  the  housckeciwr  or  someone 

If  6 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

who  said  that  they  went  for  a walk  with  the  dog  as  usual 
that  day.” 

“In  examination  of  the  body,  was  there  any  sign  that 
Lady  Ravenscroft  had  been  bitten  by  a dog?  Not  neces- 
sarily very  recently  or  on  that  particular  day?” 

“Well,  it’s  odd  you  should  say  that.  I can’t  say  I’d 
have  remembered  about  it  if  you  hadn’t  mentioned  such 
a thing.  But,  yes,  there  were  a couple  of  scars.  Not  bad 
ones.  But  again  the  housekeeper  mentioned  that  the  dog 
had  attacked  its  mistress  more  than  once  and  bitten  her, 
though  not  very  severely.  Look  here,  Poirot,  there 
was  no  rabies  about,  if  that’s  what  you  are  thinlring. 
There  couldn’t  have  been  anything  of  that  kind.  After 
all,  she  was  shot — they  were  both  shot.  There  was  no 
question  of  any  septic  poisoning  or  danger  of  tetanus.” 

“I  do  not  blame  the  dog,”  said  Poirot;  “it  was  only 
something  I wanted  to  know.” 

“One  dog  bite  was  fairly  recent,  about  a week  before, 
I think,  or  two  weeks,  somebody  said.  There  was  no 
case  of  necessary  injections  or  anything  of  that  kind.  It 
had  healed  quite  well.  What’s  that  quotation?”  went 
on  Superintendent  Garroway.  “ ‘The  dog  it  was  that 
died.’  I can’t  remember  where  it  comes  frbm,  but — ” 

“Anyway,  it  wasn’t  the  dog  that  died,”  said  Poirot. 
“That  wasn’t  the  point  of  my  question.  I would  like  to 
have  known  that  dog.  He  was  perhaps  a very  intelligent 
dog.” 

After  he  had  replaced  the  receiver  with  thanks  to  the 
Superintendent,  Poirot  murmured:  “An  intelligent  dog. 
More  intelligent  perhaps  than  the  police  were.” 


197 


17* 

POIROT  ANNOUNCES  DEPARTURE 

Liviii^tc^c  sitowcil  ill  ii  piicst.  Mr*  Hercules  Poi» 

As  soon  us  Miss  Livingstone  hail  left  t!ic  looiti)  Poi- 
rot shut  the  liiKJf  after  her  and  sat  di^wn  by  his  fncud) 
Mrs.  Ariadne  Oliver. 

He  .said,  lowering  his  voice  sligittly,  “!  depart. 

“You  do  what'/"  said  Mrs,  Oliver,  who  was  always 
slightly  startled  by  P«irut’.H  metlUHls  of  passing  on  in- 
formation. 

*i  depart.  I make  the  departure.  I take  a plane  to 

“You  sound  m though  you  were  UNO  or  UNESCO 

or  .something.”  , « 

“No.  It  is  just  a private  visit  that  I make. 

198 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Have  you  got  an  elephant  in  Geneva?” 

“Well,  I suppose  you  might  look  at  it  that  way.  Per- 
haps two  of  them.”  : 

“I  haven’t  found  out  anything  more,”  said  Mrs.  Oli- 
ver. “In  fact,  I don’t  know  who  I can  go  to  to  find  out 
any  more.” 

“I  believe  you  mentioned,  or  somebody  did,  that  your 
goddaughter,  Celia  Ravenscroft,  had  a young  brother.” 

“Yes.  He’s  called  Edward,  I think.  I’ve  hardly  ever 
seen  him.  I took-  him  out  once  or  twice  from  school,  I 
remember.  But  that  was  years  ago.” 

“Where  is  he  now?” 

“He’s  at  university,  in  Canada,  I think.  Or  he’s  taking 
some  engineering  course  there.  Do  you  want  Jo  go  and 
ask  him  things?” 

“No,  not  at  the  moment.  I should  just  like  to  know 
where  he  is  now.  But  I gather  he  was  not  in  the  house 
when  this  suicide  happened?” 

“You’re  not  thinking— you’re  not  thinking  for  a mo^ 
ment  that  he  did  it,  are  you?  I mean,  shot  his  father  and^ 
his  mother,  both  of  them.  I know  boys  do  sometimes.*^ 
Very  queer  they  are  sometimes  when  they’re  at  a fun- 
ny age.” 

“He  wa.s  not  in  the  house,”  said  Poirot.  “That  I know 
already  from  my  police  reports.” 

“Have  you  found  out  anything  else  interesting?  You 
look  quite  excited.”  : 

“I  am  excited,  in  a way.  I have  found  out  certain 
things  that  may  throw  light  upon  what  we  already 
know.” 

“Weil,  what  throws  light  on  what?” 

“It  seems  to  me  possible  now  that  I can  understand 
why  Mr.s.  Burton-Cox  approached  you  as  she  did  and 
tried  to  get  you  to  obtain  information  for  her  about  the 


199 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


facts  Of  the  suicide  Of  the  Ravenscrofts.” 

“You  lueau  she  wasn't  just  bein^  a nosey “parker. 

“No.  I think  there  was  some  motive  behind  it.  This 

is  where,  perhaps,  money  conies  in.”  ^ 

“Money?  What’s  money  got  to  do  with  that?  Shes 


quite  well  off,  isn’t  she?” 

“She  has  enough  to  live  upon,  yes.  But  it  seems  that 
her  adopted  son,  whom  she  regaids  apparently  as  her 
true  son— he  knows  that  he  was  adopted  although  he 
knows  nothing  about  the  family  from  which  he  really 
came  It  seems  that  when  he  came  of  age  he  made  a 
wUl  possibly  urged  by  his  adopted  mother  to  do  so. 
Perhaps  it  was  merely  hinted  to  him  by  .some  friends  of 
hers  or  possibly  by  some  lawyer  that  she  luid  consulted. 
Anyway,  on  coming  of  age  he  may  have  felt  that  he 
might  as  well  leave  everything  to  her,  to  his  adopted 
mother.  Presumably  at  that  time  he  had  nobody  else  to 


leave  it  to.”  . 

“I  don’t  see  how  that  leads  to  wanting  news  about  a 


suicide.” 

“Don’t  you?  She  wanted  to  discourage  the  marriage. 
If  young  Desmond  had  a girl  friend,  if  he  proposed  to 
marry  her  in  the  near  future,  which  is  what  a lot  of 
young  people  do  nowadays — they  can’t  wait  or  think  it 
over.  In  that  ca.se,  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  would  not  inherit 
the  money  he  left,  since  tfic  marriage  would  invalidate 
any  earlier  will,  and  presumably  if  he  tlTd  marry  his  girl, 
he  would  make  a new  will  leaving  everything  to  her  and 


not  to  his  adopted  mother.” 

“And  you  mean  Mrs.  Burton-Cox  didn’t  want  that? 

“She  wanted  to  find  something  that  would  di.scourage 
him  from  marrying  the  girl.  I think  .she  hoi>cd,  and  prob- 
ably really  believed  as  far  m that  goes,  that  Celia's  moth- 
er killed  her  husbMd,  afterwards  shooting  herself.  That 


200 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

is  the  sort  of  thing  that  might  discourage  a boy.  Even  if 
her  father  lulled  her  mother,  it  is  still  a discouraging 
thought.  It  might  quite  easily  prejudice  and  influence  a 
boy  at  that  age.” 

You  mean  he’d  think  if  her  father  or  mother  was  a 
murderer,  the  girl  might  have  murderous  tendencies?” 

“Not  quite  as  crude  as  that,  but  that  might  be  the 
main  idea,  I should  think.” 

“But  he  wasn’t  rich,  was  he?  An  adopted  child.” 

“He  didn’t  know  his  real  mother’s  name  or  who  she 
was,  but  it  seems  that  his  mother,  who  was  an  actress 
and  a singer  and  who  managed  to  make  a great  deal 
of  money  before  she  became  ill  and  died,  wanted  at 
one  time  to  get  her  child  returned  to  her,  and  when 
Mrs.  Burton-Cox  would  not  agree  to  that,  I .should 
imagine  she  thought  about  this  boy  a greaf  deal  and  de- 
cided that  she  would  leave  her  money  to  him.  He  will 
inherit  this  money  at  the  age  of  twenty-five,  but  it  is 
held  in  trust  for  him  until  then.  So  of  course  Mrs.  Bur- 
ton-Cox doesn’t  want  him  to  marry,  or  only  to  marry 
someone  that  she  really  approves  of  or  over  whom  she 
might  have  influence.” 

“Yes,  that  seems  to  me  fairly  reasonable.  She’s  not  a 
nice  woman,  though,  is  she?” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “I  did  not  think  her  a very  nice 
woman.” 

“And  that’s  why  she  (fldn’t  want  you  coming  to  see 
her  and' messing  about  with  things  and  finchng  out  what 
she  was  up  to.” 

“Possibly,”  said  Poirot. 

“Anything  else  you  have  learned?” 

“Yes,  I have  learned — that  is,  only  a few  hours  ago 
really — ^when  Superintendei^t  Garroway  happened  to 
ring  me  up  about  some  other  small  matters,  but  I did 

201 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

ask  him  and  he  told  me  that  the  housekeeper,  who  was 
elderly,  had  very  bad  eyesight.” 

“Does  that  come  into  it  anywhere?” 

“It  might,”  said  Poirot.  He  looked  at  his  watch.  “I 
think,”  he  said,  “it  is  time  that  I left.” 

^*You.  are  on  yonr  way  to  catch  yom  plane  at  the  aix* 

port?” 

“No.  My  plane  docs  not  leave  until  h>mormw  morn- 
ing. But  there  is  a place  I have  to  visit  today-  -a  place 
that  I wish  to  see  with  my  own  eyes.  I have  a car  wait- 
ing outside  now  to  take  me  there~-” 

“What  is  it  you  want  to  sec?"  Mrs.  Oliver  asked  with 

some  curiosity.  , , , 

“Not  so  much  to  see — to  fee}.  Yes,  tluit  is  tlic  right 

^ord to  feel  and  to  recognize  what  it  will  be  that  I 

feel . . 


262 


18. 

INTERLUDE 


Hercule  Poirot  passed  through  the  gate  of  the  church- 
yard. He  walked  up  one  of  the  paths,  and  presently, 
against  a moss-grown  wall,  he  stopped,  looking  down 
oa  a grave.  He  stood  there  for  some  minutes  looking 
first  at  the  grave,  then  at  the  view  of  the  Downs  and  sea 
beyond.  Then  his  eyes  came  back  again.  Flowers  had 
been  put  recently  on  the  grave.  A small  bunch  of  as- 
sorted wild  flowers,  the  kind  of  bunch  that  might  have 
been  left  by  a child,  but  Poirot  did  not  think  that  it  was 
a child  who  had  left  them.  He  read  the  lettering  on  the 
grave. 

TO  THE  MEMORY  OF 
DOROTHEA  JARROW 
Died  Sept.  15th,  1952 


203 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


ALSO  OF 

MARGARET  RAVENSCROFT 
Died  Oct.  3rd,  1952 


SISTER  OF  AMOVE 
ALSO  OP 

ALISTAIR  RAVliNSC'ROFr 
Died  Oct.  3rd,  1952 
HER  HUSBAND 

In  their  Death  they  were  not  divided 


I 

I 


Forgive  us  our  trespa.sscs 

As  we  forgive  those  that  trespass  again.st  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Christ,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

Poirot  stood  there  a moment  or  two.  He  nodded  his 
head  once  or  twice.  Then  he  left  tin*  chiirciiyard  and 
walked  by  a footpath  that  led  out  on  flic  cliff  and , 
along  it.  Presently  he  stood  .still  again,  kx^king  out  to  the 
sea.  He  spoke  to  himself. 

“I  am  .sure  now  that  I know  wft.at  liappened  and  why. 

I understand  the  pity  of  if  and  the  tragetly.  One  has  to  ' 
go  back  .such  a long  way.  In  mv  etui  is  my  beginning,  | 
or  should  one  put  it  difTcreiifly?  in  my  beginning  was 
my  tragic  erui’*?  The  Swiss  girl  must  have  known— but 
will  she  tell  me?  The  boy  believes  she  will.  For  their  i 
sakes — the  girl  and  the  boy.  They  cannot  accept  life  ! 
unless  tlicy  know."  i 


19. 

MADDY  AND  Z£LIE 


“Mademoiselle  Rouselle?”  said  Hercale  Poirot.  He 
bowed. 

Mademoiselle  Rouselle  extended  her  hand.  About 
fifty,  Poirot  thought.  A fairly  imperious  woman.  Would 
have  her  way.  Intelligent,  intellectual,  satisfied,  he 
thought,  with  life  as  she  had  lived  it,  enjoying  the  plea- 
sures and  suffering  the  sorrows  life  brings. 

“I  have  heard  your  name,”  she  said.  “You  have 
friends,  you  know,  both  in  this  country  and  in  France. 
I do  not  know  exactly  what  I can  do  for  you.  Oh,  I 
know  that  you  explained,  in  the  letter  that  you  sent  me. 
It  is  an  aflfair  of  the  past,  is  it  not?  Things  that  happened. 
Not  exactly  things  that  happened,  but  the  clue  to  things 
that  happened  many,  many  years  ago.  But  sit  down. 

205 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Yes.  Yes,  that  chair  is  quite  comfortable,  I hope.  There 
are  some  petits  fours  and  the  decanter  is  on  the  table.” 

She  was  quietly  hospitable  without  any  urgency.  She 
was  unworried  but  amiable. 

“You  were  at  one  time  a govcrne.ss  in  a certain  fam- 
ily,” said  Poirot.  “The  Ravcnscroft.s.  Perhaps  now  you 
hardly  remember  them.” 

“Oh,  yes,  one  does  not  forget,  you  know,  things  that- 
happen  when  you  were  young.  There  was  a girl,  and  a 
boy  about  four  or  five  years  younger  in  the  family  I 
went  to.  They  were  nice  children,  llieir  father  was  a 
general  in  the  Army.” 

“There  was  also  another  sister.” 

♦‘Ah,  yes,  I remember.  She  was  not  there  when  I first 
came.  I think  she  was  delicate.  Her  health  was  not 
good.  She  was  having  treatment  somewhere.” 

“You  remember  their  mother’s  C’hristian  name?” 

“Margaret,  I think  was  one.  The  other  otic  I am  not 
sure  of  by  now.” 

“Dorothea.” 

“Ah,  yes.  A name  I have  not  often  come  acrosa.  But 
they  called  each  other  by  shorter  names.  Molly  and 
Dolly.  They  were  identical  twins,  you  know,  remark- 
ably alike.  They  were  both  very  handsome  young 
women.” 

“And  they  were  fond  of  each  other?" 

“Yes,  tlicy  were  devoted.  But  we  stre,  arc  wc  not, 
becoming  slightly  confused?  Prcsttm-Clrey  is  not  the 
name  of  the  children  I went  to  teach.  IXmothwi  Preston- 
Grey  married  a major—ah,  I cannot  remember  the 
name  now.  Arrow?  No,  Jarrow.” 

“Ravcnscroft,”  said  Poirot. 

“Ah,  that.  Yes.  Curious  how  one  cannot  remember 
names.  The  Preston-Oreys  are  a generation  older.  Mai- 

m 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

garet  Preston-Grey  had  been  in  a pensionnat  in  this 
part  of  the  world,  and  when  she  wrote  after  her  mar- 
riage asking  Madame  Benoit,  who  ran  that  pensionnat, 
if  she  knew  of  someone  who  would  come  to  her  as 
nursery-governess  to  her  two  children,  I was  recom- 
mended. That  is  how  I came  to  go  there.  I spoke  only 
of  the  other  sister  because  she  happened  to  be  staying 
there  during  part  of  my  time  of  service  with  the  chil- 
dren. The  children  were  a girl,  I think  then  of  six  or 
seven.  She  had  a name  out  of  Shakespeare,  I remember. 
Rosalind  or  Celia.” 

“CeUa,”  said  Poirot. 

“And  the  boy  was  only  about  three  or  four.  His  name 
was  Edward.  A mischievous  but  lovable  child.  I was 
happy  with  them.” 

“And  they  were  happy,  I hear,  with  you.  They  en- 
joyed playing  with  you  and  you  were  very  kind  in 
your  playing  with  them.” 

"Moi,  j’aime  les  enfants."  said  Mademoiselle  Rou- 
selle. 

“They  called  you  Maddy,  I believe.” 

She  laughed. 

“Ah,  I like  hearing  that  word.  It  brings  back  past 
memories.” 

“Did  you  know  a boy  called  Desmond?  Desmond 
Burton-Cox?” 

“Ah,  yes.  He  lived,  I think,  in  a house  next  door  or 
nearly  next  door.  We  had  several  neighbors  and  the 
children  very  often  came  to  play  together.  His  namp.  was 
Desmond.  Yes,  I remember.” 

“You  were  there  long,  mademoiselle?” 

“No.  I was  only  therfe  for  three  or  four  years  at  most. 
Then  I was  recalled  to  this  country.  My  mother  was 
very  ill.  It  was  a question  of  conodng  back  and  nursing 

207 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

her,  although  I knew  it  would  not  be  perhaps  for  very 
long.  That  was  true.  She  died  a year  and  a half  or  two 
years  at  the  most  after  I returned  here.  After  that  I 
started  a small  pemionmt  out  here,  taking  in  rather  old- 
er girls  who  wanted  to  study  languages  and  other  things. 

I did  not  visit  England  again,  although  for  a year  or  two 
I kept  up  communication  with  the  country.  The  two 
children  used  to  send  me  a card  at  Chnstmtistimc.” 

“Did  General  Ravenscroft  and  his  wife  strike  you 
as  a happy  couple?” 

“Very  happy.  They  were  fond  of  their  children.” 

“They  were  very  well  .suited  to  each  other?” 

“Yes,  they  seemed  to  me  to  have  all  the  necessary 
qualities  to  make  their  marruige  a success.” 

“You  said  Mrs.  Ravenscroft  wa.s  devoted  to  her  twin 
sister.  Was  the  twin  sister  also  devoted  to  her?” 

“Well,  I had  not  very  much  wcasion  of  jud^ng. 
Frankly,  I thought  that  tfte  sister— Dolly,  as  they 
called  her— was  very  definitely  a mental  ca.se.  Once  or 
twice  she  acted  in  a very  peculiar  manner.  She  was  a 
jealous  woman,  I think,  and  1 ut«fcr.si<H>d  that  she  had 
at  one  time  thought  she  was  engtiged,  or  wa.s  going  to  be 
engaged,  to  Major  Ravenscroft.  As  far  as  I could  see, 
he’d  fallen  in  love  with  her  first,  tlicn  later,  however, 
his  affections  turned  towards  her  sister,  which  was  for- 
tunate, I thought,  because  Molly  Ravenscroft  wa.s  a 
well-balanced  and  very  sweet  woman.  As  for  Dolly— 
sometimes  I thoug^it  she  adored  her  sister,  .sometimes 
that  she  hated  her.  She  was  a very  jenkHW  woman  and 
she  decided  too  much  affection  was  being  shown  to  the 
children.  There  is  one  who  could  tel!  ym  about  all  this 
better  than  I.  MademobeUe  Mcuuhourat.  .S!)e  lives  in 
Lausanne  and  she  wtent  to  the  Rsivcnscrtffts  about  a 
year  and  a half  to  two  years  after  I hud  w leave.  She 

208 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

was  wth  them  for  some  years.  Later  I believe  she  went 
back  as  companion 'to  Mrs.  Ravenscroft  when  Gelia 
was  abroad  at  school.” 

“I  am  going  to  see  her.  I have  her  address,”  said 
Poirot. 

“She  knows  a great  deal  that  I do  not,  and  she  is  a 
channing  and  reliable  person.  It  was  a terrible  tragedy 
that  happened  later.  She  knows  if  anyone  does  what  led 
to  it.  She  is  very  discreet  She  has  never  told  me  any- 
thing. Whether  she  will  tell  you,  I do  not  know.  She 
may  do,  she  may  not.” 

Poirot  stood  for  a moment  or  two  looking  at  Mademoi- 
selle Meauhourat.  He  had  been  impressed  by  Made- 
moiselle Rouselle.  He  was  impressed  also  by  the  wom- 
an who  stood  waiting  to  receive  him  now.  She  was  not 
so  formidable,  she  was  much  younger,  at  least  ten 
years  younger,  he  thought,  add  she  had  a different  kind 
of  impressiveness.  She  was  alive,  still  attractive,  eyes 
that  watched  you  and  made  their  own  judgment  on  you, 
willing  to  welcome  you,  looking  with  Mndlmess  on  those 
who  came  her  way,  but  without  undue  softness.  Here  is 
someone,  thought  Hercule  Poirot,  very  remarkable. 

“I  am  Hercule  Poirot,  mademoiselle.” 

“I  know.  I was  expecting  you  either  today  or  tomor- 
row.” 

! “Ah.  You  received  a letter  from  me?” 

“No.  It  is  no  doubt  still  in  the  post.  Our  posts  are  a lit- 
tle uncertain.  No.  I had  a letter  from  someone  else.” 

“From  Celia  Ravenscroft?” 

“No.  It  was  a letter  written  by  someone  in  close  touch 
with  Celia.  A boy  or  a young  man,  whichever  we  like 
to  regard  him  as,  called  Desmond  Burton-Cox.  He  pre- 
pared me  for  your  arrival.” 


209 


ELEPHANTS  0AN  REMEMBER 

“Ah.  I see.  He  is  intelligent  and  he  wastes  no  time, 
I think.  He  was  very  urgent  that  I should  come  and  see 
you.” 

“So  I gathered.  There’s  trouble,  I understand.  Trou- 
ble that  he  wants  to  resolve,  and  .so  docs  Celia.  They 
think  you  can  help  them?” 

“Yes,  and  they  think  that  you  can  help  tne.” 

“They  are  in  love  with  each  other  and  wish  to  marry.” 

“Yes,  but  there  are  difficulties  being  put  in  their 
way.” 

“Ah,  by  Desmond’s  mother,  I presume.  So  he  lets  me 
understand.” 

“There  are  circumstances,  or  have  Ix'cn  circum- 
stances, in  Celia’s  life  that  have  prejudiced  his  mother 
against  his  early  marriage  to  this  particular  girl.” 

“Ah.  Because  of  the  tragedy,  for  it  was  a tragedy.” 

“Yes,  because  of  the  tragedy.  Celia  ha.s  a gtvdmother 
who  was  asked  by  Dc.smond’.s  mother  to  try  and  find  out 
from  Celia  the  exact  circumstances  under  which  that 
suicide  occurred.” 

“There’s  no  sense  in  that,”  said  Mademoiselle  Mcau- 
hourat.  She  motioned  with  her  hand.  “Sit  down.  Please 
sit  down.  I expect  we  shall  have  to  talk  for  some  little 
time.  Yes,  Celia  could  not  tell  her  godmother — Mrs. 
Ariadne  Oliver,  the  novelist,  is  it  not?  Yes,  1 remem- 
ber. Celia  could  not  give  her  the  Information  because 
she  has  not  got  the  information  herself.” 

“She  was  not  there  when  the  tragedy  occurred,  and 
no  one  told  her  anything  ab<ju{  it.  Is  that  right?” 

“Yes,  that  is  right.  It  was  thought  insulvi.sable.” 

“Ah.  And  do  you  approve  of  that  decision  or  disap- 
prove of  it?” 

“It  is  difficult  to  be  sure.  Very  difficult.  I’ve  not  been 
sure  of  it  in  the  years  that  have  passed  since  then,  and 

210 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

there  are  quite  a lot.  Celia,  as  far  as  I know,  has  never 
been  worried.  Worried,  I mean,  as  to  the  why  and 
wherefore.  She’s  accepted  it  as  she  would  have  accept- 
ed an  airplane  accident  or  a car  accident.  Something 
that  resulted  in  the  death  of  her  parents.  She  spent 
many  years  in  a pensionnat  abroad.” 

“Actually  I think  the  pensionnat  was  run  by  you. 
Mademoiselle  Meauhourat.” 

“That  is  quite  true.  I have  retired  recently.  A col- 
league of  mine  is  now  taking  it  on.  But  Celia  was  sent 
out  to  me  and  I was  asked  to  find  for  her  a good  place 
for  her  to  continue  her  education,  as  many  girls  do 
come  to  Switzerland  for  that  purpose.  I could  have 
recommended  several  places.  At  the  moment  I took 
her  into  my  own.” 

"And  Celia  asked  you  nothing,  didnot  demand  infor- 
mation?” 

“No.  It  was,  you  see,  before  the  tragedy  happened.” 

“Oh.  I did  not  quite  understand  that.” 

“Celia  came  out  here  some  weeks  before  the  tragic  oc- 
currence. I was  at  that  time  not  here  myself.  I was  still 
with  General  and  Lady  Ravenscroft.  I looked  after 
Lady  Ravenscroft,  acting  as  a companion  to  her  rather 
than  as  a governess  to  Celia,  who  was  still  at  that  mo- 
ment in  boarding-school.  But  it  was  suddenly  arrangec 
that  Ceiia  should  come  to  Switzerland  and  finish  he: 
education  there.” 

“Lady  Ravenscroft  had  been  in  poor  health,  had  she 
not?” 

“Yes.  Nothing  very  serious.  Nothing  as  serious  as 
she  had  herself  feared  at  one  time.  But  she  had  suf- 
fered a lot  of  nervous  strain  and  shock  and  general 
worry.” 

“You  remained  with  her?” 


211 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

"A  sister  whom  I had  living  in  Lausanne  received 
Celia  on  her  arrival  and  settled  her  inti>  the  institution 
which  was  only  for  about  hftecn  or  sixteen  girls,  but 
there  she  would  start  her  studies  and  await  my  return. 

I returned  some  three  or  four  weeks  later.  ’ 

“But  you  were  at  Ovcrclifle  at  the  time  it  happened.” 

“I  was  at  OvcrcIilTe.  General  and  I ,ady  Ravenscroft 
went  for  a walk,  as  wa,s  their  habit.  'I'hey  wont  out 
and  did  not  return.  They  were  found  dead,  shot.  The 
weapon  was  found  lying  by  them.  It  was  tvne  that  be- 
longed to  General  Ravenscroft  and  had  been  always 
kept  in  a drawer  in  his  study.  'I'hc  fingermarks  of  both 
of  them  were  found  on  thsit  wenpoti.  'i’herc  was  no 
definite  indication  of  who  had  held  it  la.st.  Impressions 
of  both  people,  slightly  smeared,  were  on  it.  I he  obvious 
-olution  was  a double  suicide.” 

“You  found  no  reason  to  doubt  that?” 

“The  police  found  no  reason,  so  1 believe.” 

“Ah,”  said  Poirot. 

“I  beg  your  pardon?”  ssiid  Madenuiisellc  Meauhourat. 

“Nothing.  Nothing.  Just  something  upon  which  i re- 
flect.” 

Poirot  looked  at  her.  Brown  hair  ns  yet  hardly 
touched  with  gray,  lips  closed  firmly  togetlier,  gray  eyes, 
a face  which  showed  no  emotion.  She  was  in  control  of 
henself  completely. 

“So  you  cannot  tell  me  anything  more?” 

“I  fear  not.  It  was  a long  time  ago.” 

“You  remember  that  time  well  enough.” 

“Yes.  One  cannot  entirely  forget  such  a sad  thing.” 

“And  you  agreed  that  Celia  should  not  be  told  any- 
thing more  of  what  had  led  up  to  this?" 

“Have  1 not  just  told  you  that  I had  n«  extra  informa- 
tion?” 


212 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


“You  were  there,  living  at  Overclifle,  for  a period 
of  time  before  the  tragedy,  were  you  not?  Four  or  five 
weeks — six  weeks,  perhaps.” 

“Longer  than  that,  really.  Although  I had  been  gov- 
erness to  Celia  early,  I came  back  this  time,  after  she 
went  to  school,  in  order  to  help  Lady  Ravenscroft.” 

“Lady  Ravenscroft’s  sister  was  living  with  her  also 
about  that  time,  was  she  not?” 

“Yes.  She  had  been  in  hospital  having  special  treat-'' 
ment  for  some  time.  She  had  shown  much  improvement 
and  the  authorities  had  felt— rthe  medical  authorities  I 
speak  of — that  she  would  do  better  to  lead  a normal 
life  with  her  own  relations  and  the  atmosphere  of  a 
home.  As  Celia  had  gone  to  school,  it  seemed  a good 
time  for  Lady  Ravenscroft  to  invite  her  sister  to  be 
with  her.” 

“Were  they  fond  of  each  other,  those  two  sisters?” 

“It  was  difficult  to  know,”  said  Mademoiselle  Meau- 
hourat.  Her  brows  drew  together.  It  was  as  though  what 
Poirot  had  just  said  aroused  her  interest.  “I  have  won- 
dered, you  know.  I have  wondered  so  much  since,  and 
at  the  time,  really.  They  were  identical  twins,  you  know. 
They  had  a bond  between  them,  a bond  of  mutual  de- 
pendence and  love  and  in  many  ways  they  were  very 
alike.  But  there  were  ways  also  in  which  they  were  not 
alike.” 

“You  mean?  I should  be  glad  to  know  just  what  you 
mean  by  that.” 

“Oh,  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  tragedy.  Nothing 
of  that  kind.  But  there  was  a definite,  as  I shall  put  it,  a 
definite  physical  or  mental  flaw — whichever  way  you 
like  to  put  it.  Some  people  nowadays  hold  the  theory 
that  there  is  some  physical  cause  for  any  kind  of  mental 
disorder.  I believe  that  it  is  fairly  well  recognized  by 


213 


ElEPHflKTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

the  incdiczil  profession  th*it  icicnticul  twins  ure  hom 
either  with  a great  bond  between  them,  u great  likeness 
in  their  characters  wiiich  means  that  although  they 
may  be  divided  in  their  environment,  where  they  are 
brought  up,  the  same  things  will  hasipcn  to  them  at  the 
same  time  of  life.  They  will  take  t!u*  same  trend.  Some 
of  the  cases  quoted  as  medical  examples  seem  quite 
extraordinary.  Two  sisters,  one  living  in  F.uropc,  one, 
say,  in  France,  the  other  in  Ihigiand,  they  have  a dog  of 
the  same  kind  which  they  choose  at  about  the  same 
date.  They  marry  men  singularly  alike.  They  give  birth 
perhaps  to  a child  almost  within  ii  month  of  each  other. 
It  is  as  though  they  have  to  follow  the  pjittern  wherever 
they  are  and  without  knowing  what  the  other  one  is  do- 
. ing.  Then  there  is  the  opposite  to  that.  A kind  of  re- 
vulsion, a hatred  almost,  that  makes  one  sister  draw 
apart,  or  one  brother  reject  the  other  us  though  they  seek 
to  get  away  from  the  .sameness,  the  likcnes.s,  the  knowl- 
edge, the  things  they  have  in  common.  And  that  can 
lead  to  very  strange  results.” 

“I  know,”  said  Poirot.  *i  have  heatti  of  it.  1 have  seen 
it  once  or  twice.  Love  can  ftirn  to  hate  very  easily.  It 
is  easier  to  hate  where  ytm  have  loved  than  it  is  to  be 
indifferent  where  you  have  loved,” 

“Ah,  you  know  tliat,”  .stdd  Mailemoi.selle  Meau- 
hourat. 

“Yes,  I have  seen  it  not  once  but  several  times.  Lady 
Ravenscroft's  sister  was  very  like  lier?" 

“1  think  .she  waus  still  very  like  her  in  appearance, 
though,  if  1 may  say  sti,  the  expression  on  her  face  was 
very  different.  She  was  in  a condition  of  strain  as  Lady 
Ravcn.scroft  was  not.  She  had  a great  aversion  to  chil- 
dren, I don*t  know  why.  Perhaps  she  liinl  luul  a mi«ar- 
riage  in  early  Ufc.  Perhaps  she  had  longed  for  a child 

214 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

and  never  had  one,  but  she  had  a kind  of  resentment 
against  children.  A dislike  of  them.” 

“That  had  led  to  one  or  two  rather  serious  happen- 
ings, had  it  not?”  said  Poirot. 

“Someone  has  told  you  that?” 

“I  have  heard  things  from  people  who  knew  both  sis- 
ters when  they  were  in  India.  Lady  Ravenscroft  was 
there  with  her  husband  and  her  sister,  DoUy,  came  out 
to  stay  with  them  there.  There  was  an  accident  to  a 
child  there,  and  it  was  thought  that  DoUy  might  have 
been  partially  responsible  for  it.  Nothing  was-  proved 
definitely,  but  I gather  that  Molly’s  husband  took  his 
sister-in-law  home  to  England  and  she  had  once  more  to 
go  into  a mental  home.” 

“Yes,  I believe  that  js  a very  good  account  of  what 
happened.  I do  not  of  course  know  it  of  my  own  knowl- 
edge.” 

“No,  but  there  are  things  you  do  know,  I think,  from 
your  own  knowledge.” 

“If  so,  I see  no  reason  for  bringing  them  back  to 
mind  now.  Is  it  not  better  to  leave  things  vyhen  at  least 
they  have  been  accepted?” 

“There  are  other  things  that  could  have  happened 
that  day  at  Overcliff e.  It  may  have  been  a double  ''sui- 
cide, it  could  have  been  a murder,  it  could  have  l?een 
several  other  things.  You  were  told  what  had  happened, 
but  1 think,  from  one  little  sentence  you  just  said,  that 
you  know  what  happened  of  your  own  knowledge.  You 
know  what  happened  that  day  and  I think  you  know 
what  happened  perhaps — or  began  to  happen,  shall  we 
say? — sometime  before  that.  The  time  when  Celia  had 
gone  to  Switzerland  and  you  were  still  at  Overcliffe.  I 
will  a.sk  you  one  question.  I would  like  to  know  what 
your  answer  would  be  to  it.  It  is  not  a thing  of  direct 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

information.  It  is  a question  of  what  you  believe.  What 
were  the  feelings  of  General  Ravenscroft  towards  those 
two  sisters,  the  twin  sisters?” 

“I  know  what  you  mean.” 

For  the  first  time  her  manner  changed  slightly.  She 
was  no  longer  on  her  guard.  She  leaned  forward  now 
and  spoke  to  Poirot  almost  as  though  .she  definitely 
found  a relief  in  doing  .so. 

“They  were  both  beautiful,"  she  said,  “a.s  girls.  I 
heard  that  from  many  people.  General  Ravenscroft 
fell  in  love  with  Dolly,  tiie  mentally  alllicted  sister.  Al- 
though she  had  a disturbed  personality,  she  was  exceed- 
ingly attractive — sexually  attractive.  He  loved  iwr  very 
dearly,  and  then  I don’t  know  whether  he  discovered 
in  her  some  characteri.stic,  simrcthing  perhaps  that 
alarmed  him  or  in  which  he  hnmd  a repulsion  of  some 
kind.  He  saw  perhaps  the  beginning  of  insanity  in  her, 
the  dangers  connected  with  her.  His  affections  went  to 
her  sister.  He  fell  in  love  with  the  .sister  and  married 
her.” 

“He  loved  them  both,  you  mean.  Not  at  the  same 
time,  but  in  each  case  there  wa.s  genuine  fact  of  love.” 

“Oh,  yes,  he  was  devoted  t(j  Molly,  relied  on  her  and 
she  on  him.  He  was  a very  lovable  man.” 

“Forgive  me,”  said  Poirot.  “Ytiu,  Ukj,  were  in  love 
with  him,  I think.” 

“You — you  dare  say  that  to  me?” 

“Yes.  I dare  say  it  to  you.  I am  not  suggesting  that 
you  and  he  had  a love  affair.  Nothing  of  that  kind.  I’m 
only  saying  that  you  loved  hint." 

“Yes,"  said  Zilie  Meauhourat.  ‘i  loved  him.  In  a 
sense,  I still  love  him.  There’s  nothing  to  be  ashamed 
of.  He  tru.sted  me  and  relied  on  me,  but  he  was  never 
in  love  with  me.  Ywj  can  love  and  serve  and  still  be 


216 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

happy.  I wanted  no  more  than  I had.  Trust,  sympathy 
belief  in  me— ” ^ / 

“^d  you  did,”  said  Poirot,  “what  you  could  to  help 
him  in  a terrible  crisis  in  his  life.  There  are  things  you 
do  not  wish  to  tell  me.  There  are  things  that  I will  say  to 
you,  things  that  I have  gathered  from  various  infor- 
mation that  has  come  to  me,  that  I know  something 
about.  Before  I have  come  to  see  you,  I have  heard 
from  others,  from  people  who  have  known  not  only 
Lady  Ravenscroft,  not  only  Molly,  but  who  have 
known  Dolly.  And  I know  something  of  Dolly,  the 
tragedy  of  her  life,  the  sorrow,  the  unhappiness  and  also 
the  hatred,  the  streak  perhaps  of  evil,  the  love  of  de- 
struction that  can  be  handed  down  in  families.  If  she 
loved  the  man  she  was  engaged  to,  she  must  have, 
when  he  married  her  sister,  felt  hatred  perhaps  towards 
that  sister.  Perhaps  she  never  quite  forgave  her.  But 
what  of  Molly  Ravenscroft?  Did  she  dislike  her  sister? 
Did  she  hate  her?” 

“Oh,  no,”  said  Z61ie  Meauhourat,  “she  loved  her 
sister.  She  loved  her  with  a very  deep  and  protective 
love.  That  I do  know.  It  was  she  who  always  asked  that 
her  sister  should  come  and  make  her  home  with  hen 
She  wanted  to  save  her  sister  from  unhappiness,  from 
danger  too,  because  her  sister  would  often  relapse  into 
fits  of  rather  dangerous  rages.  She  was  fri^tened 
sometimes.  Well,  you  know  enough.  You  have  al- 
ready said  that  there  was  a strange  dislike  of  children 
from  which  Dolly  suffered.” 

“You  mean  that  shp  disliked  Celia?” 

“No,  no,  not  Celia.  The  other  one.  Edward.  The 
your^er  one.  Twice  Edward  had  dangers  of  an  acci- 
dent. Once  some  kind  of  tinkering  with  a car  and  once 
some  outburst  of  violent  annoyance.  I know  Mdly  was 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

glad  when.  Edward  went  back  to  scliool.  I-Tc  was  very 
young,  remember— much  younger  than  Celia.  lie  was 
only  eight  or  nine  at  preparatory  school.  He  was  vul- 
nerable. Molly  was  frightened  about  him.” 

“Ye.s,”  said  Poirot,  “I  can  understaiKi  that.  Now,  if  I 
may,  1 will  talk  of  wigs.  Wigs,  the  wearing  of  wigs.  Four 
wigs.  That  is  a lot  for  one  woman  to  possess  at  one  time, 
I know  what  they  were  like,  what  they  looked  like.  I 
know  that  when  more  were  neeckai,  a f'rencit  lady  went 
to  the  shop  in  London  and  spoke  about  them  and  or- 
dered them.  There  was  a dog,  too.  A dog  who  went  for 
a walk  on  the  day  of  the  tragedy  with  ( umeral  Ravens- 
croft  and  his  wife.  Earlier  that  dog,  some  little  time 
earlier,  had  bitten  his  mistress,  Molly  Kavenscroft.” 

“Dogs  are  like  that,”  said  Zelie  Meaulunirat.  “They 
are  never  quite  to  be  trusted.  Yes.  1 know  that.” 

“And  I will  tell  you  what  1 think  hufi[Hmed  on  that 
day,  and  what  happened  beftne  that.  f»ome  little  time 
before  that.” 

“And  if  I will  not  listen  to  you?” 

“You  will  listen  to  me.  You  may  stiy  that  what  I have 
imagined  is  false.  Ye.s,  you  might  even  do  that,  hut  I do 
not  think  you  will.  I am  telling  you  amt  i believe  it  with 
all  my  heart,  that  what  is  needed  here  is  tiie  truth.  It  is 
not  just  imagining,  it  is  not  just  wondei  ing.  ‘I'hero  is  a 
girl  and  a boy  whtr  care  ft»r  each  rither  ami  who  are 
frightened  of  the  futnre  because  of  what  m.ay  have 
happened  and  whiit  there  might  be  Istimlcd  down  front 
the  father  or  the  mother  to  the  child.  I am  thinking  of 
the  girl,  (.'eltu,  A rcbeillous  girl,  spiritmi,  diJlietill  per- 
haps to  mtinage  but  with  brains,  a good  tnimi,  cttpablc 
of  happiness,  capable  of  courage,  but  m-eding  there 
are  people  who  need — 'truth.  Bceau.se  they  can  face 
trutii  without  dismay.  They  can  face  it  with  that  brave 

218 


ELEPHANTS  tm  REMEiBEi 


acceptance  that  you  have  to  have  in  life  if  life  is  to  be 
any  good  to  you.  And  the  boy  that  she  loves,  he  wants 
that  for  her,  too.  Will  you  listen  to  me?” 

‘^Yes,”  said  Zelie  Meauhourat,  “I  am  listening.  You 
understand  a great  deal,  I think,  and  I think  you  know 
more  than  I could  have  imagined  you  would  know* 
Speak  and  I will  listen.” 


219 


20. 

COURT  OF  INQUIRY 


Once  more  Hercule  Poirot  stood  on  the  ciilT  overlook- 
ing the.  rocks  below  and  the  sea  break  it*}?,  against  them. 
Here  where  lie  stO(5d  the  bodies  of  a hushaml  ;ind  wife 
had  been  found.  Here,  three  weeks  before  that  a wom- 
an had  walked  in  her  .sleep  and  fallen  to  her  eleath. 

“Why  had  these  thi«g.s'  happened?"  '1‘hat  iiad  been 
Superintendent  C5arroway*.s  quc.sfitin. 

Why?  What  had  led  to  it? 

An  accident  first — and  three  weeks  later  a double 
suicide.  Old  .sins  that  had  left  long  sluulows.  A begin- 
ning that  had  led  years  later  to  a tragic  end. 

Today  there  would  be  people  meeting  here.  A boy 
and  a girl  who  sought  the  truth.  Two  pco|>le  who  knew 
the  truili. 


220 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Hcrcule  Poirot  turned  away  from  the  sea  and  bade 
along  the  narrow  path  that  led  to  a house  once  caUed 

Overcliffe, 

It  was  not  very  far.  He  saw  cars  parked  against  a 
wall.  He  saw  the  outline  of  a house  against  the  sky.  A 
house  that  was  clearly  empty,  that  needed  repainting. 
A house  agent’s  board  hung  there,  announcing  that 
“this  desirable  property”  was  for  sale.  On  the  gate  the 
word  Overcliffe  had  a line  drawn  over  it  and  the  name 
Down  House  replaced  it.  He  went  to  meet  two  people 
who  were  walking  towards  him.  One  was  Desmond 
Burton-Cox  and  the  other  was  Celia  Ravenscroft. 

“I  got  an  order  from  the  house  agent,”  said  Des- 
mond, “saying  we  wanted  to  view  it  or  however  they 
put  it.  I’ve  got  the  key  in  case  we  want  to  go  inside.  It’s 
changed  hands  twice  in  the  last  five  years.  But  there 
wouldn’t  be  anything  to  see  there  now,  would  there?” 

“I  shouldn’t  think  so,”  said  Celia.  “After  all,  it’s  be- 
longed to  lots  of  people  already.  Some  people  called 
Archer  who  first  bought  it,  and  then  somebody  called 
Fallowfield,  I think.  They  said  it  was  too  lonely.  And 
now  these  last  people  are  selling  it,  too.  Perhaps  they 
were  haunted.” 

“Do  you  really  believe  in  hatmted  houses?”  said  Des- 
mond. ' 

“Well  now,  of  course  I don’t  think  so  really,”  said 
Celia,  “but  this  might  be,  mightn’t  it?  I mean,  the  soo 
of  things  that  happened,  the  sort  of  place  it  is  and  ev- 
erything .. .” 

“I  do  not  think  so,”  said  Poirot.  “There  was  sorrow 
here  and  death,  but  there  was  also  love.” 

A taxi  came  along  the  road. 

“I  expect  that’s  Mrs.  Oliver,”  said  Celia.  “She  said 
she’d  come  by  train  and  take  a taxi  from  the  station,” 


221 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

Two  women  got  out  of  the  taxi.  One  was  Mrs.  Oliver 
and  with  her  was  a tall,  elegantly  dres.seii  woman.  Since 
Poirot  knew  she  was  coming,  he  was  not  taken  by  sur- 
prise. He  watched  Celia  to  see  if  she  had  tiny  reactions. 

“Oh!”  Celia  sprang  forward. 

She  went  towards  the  wonuin  and  her  face  had  lit  up. 

“Z61ic!”  she  said.  “It  is  Zclic?  It  is  really  Zelic!  Oh,  I 
am  so  pleased.  I didn’t  know  you  were  coming.” 

“Monsieur  Hcrculc  Poirot  a.skcd  me  to  come.” 

“1  see,”  said  Celia.  “Yes,  yes,  I suppose  1 see.  But  I 
— didn’t — ” she  stopped.  She  turnw!  her  head  and 
looked  at  the  handsome  boy  standing  Iresiiie  her.  “Des- 
mond, was  it — was  it  you?” 

“Yes.  I wrote  to  Mademoiselle  Meauhourat — ^to 
Z6lie,  if  I may  still  call  her  that.” 

“You  can  always  call  me  thtit,  both  of  you,”  said 
Zelie.  “1  was  not  sure  I wtmted  to  come.  I did  not  know 
if  I was  wise  to  come.  That  I still  do  not  know,  but  I 
hope  so.” 

“i  want  to  know,"  said  Celia.  “We  both  want  to 
know.  Desmond  tliouglit  you  ctnild  tell  tis  something.” 

“Monsieur  Poirot  came  to  see  me,"  stiid  Zclic.  “He 
persuaded  me  to  come  today.” 

Celia  linked  her  arm  in  Mrs.  Oliver's. 

“1  wanted  you  to  come,  ttm,  becitii.se  you  put  this  in 
hand,  didn’t  you?  You  got  Monsieur  Poirot  and  you 
found  out  some  things  yourself,  ditln’t  you?” 

“People  told  me  things,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver;  “people 
whom  I tlumght  might  remember  things.  Some  of  them 
did  remember  things.  Some  of  them  rememlKred  them 
right  and  some  of  them  remembered  Ihcnt  wrong.  That 
was  confusing.  Monsieur  Poirot  says  that  thiit  does  not 
really  mutter." 

“No,”  .said  Poirot,  “it  is  just  m imi'xuliint  to  know 
what  is  hearsay  and  what  is  certain  kuowlcdi'c.  Because 

222 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

from  one  you  can  leam  facts  even  if  they  are  not 
quite  the  right  facts  or  had  not  got  the  explanation  that 
you  think  they  had.  With  the  knowledge  that  you  got 
for  me,  madame,  from  the  people  whom  you  designated 
elephants — ” He  smiled  a little. 

“Elephants?”  said  Mademoiselle  Zelie. 

“It  is  what  she  called  them,”  said  Poirot. 

“Elephants  can  remember,”  explained  Mrs.  Oliver. 
“That  was  the  idea  I started  on.  And  people  can  re- 
member things  that  happened  a long  time  ago  just  like 
elephants  can.  Not  all  people,  of  course,  but  they  can 
usually  remember  something.  There  were  a lot  of  people 
who  did.  I turned  a lot  of  the  things  I heard  over  to 
Monsieur  Poirot  and  he — ^he  has  made  a sort  of— oh,  if 
he  was  a doctor  I should  call  it  a sort  of  diagnosis,  I 
suppose.” 

“I  made  a list,”  said  Poirot.  “A  list  of  things  that 
seemed  to  be  pointers  to  the  truth  of  what  happened  all 
those  years  ago.  I shall  read  the  various  items  to  you  to' 
see  perhaps  if  you  who  were  concerned  in  all  this  feel 
that  they  have  any  significance.  You  may  not  see  their 
significance  or  you  may  see  it  plainly.” 

“One  wants  to  know,”  said  Celia.  “Was  it  suicide,  or 
was  it  murder?  Did  somebody — some  outside  person — 
kill  both  my  father  and  my  mother,  shoot  them  for  some 
rca.son  wc  don’t  know  about,  some  motive.  I shall  always 
think  there  was  something  of  that  kind  or  something 
else.  It’s  difficult,  but — ” 

“Wc  will  stay  here,  I think,”  said  Poirot.  “We  will 
not  go  into  the  house  as  yet.  Other  people  have  lived  in 
it  and  it  ha.s  a different  atmosphere.  We  will  perhaps  go 
in  if  we  wish  when  we  have  finished  our  court  of  in- 
quiry here.” 

“It’s  a court  of  inquiry,  is  it?”  said  Desmond. 


223 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Yes.  A court  of  inquiry  into  what  happened.” 

He  moved  towards  some  iron  seat.s  wliich  .stood  near 
the  shelter  of  a large  magnolia  near  the  hou.se.  Poirot 
took  from  the  case  he  carried  a .sheet  of  paper  vrith 
writing  on  it.  He  said  to  Celia : 

“To  you,  it  has  got  to  be  that  way?  A defiiute 
choice.  Suicide  or  nuirdcr,” 

“One  of  them  must  be  true,”  said  Celia. 

“I  shall  say  to  you  that  both  are  true,  and  more  than 
those  two.  According  to  my  idca.s,  wc  have  here  not 
only  a murder  and  also  a suicide,  but  wc  have  as  well 
what  I shall  call  an  execution,  and  we  Iiave  a tragedy 
also.  A tragedy  of  two  people  who  loved  each  other  and 
who  died  for  love.  A tragedy  love  may  not  always  be- 
long to  Romeo  and  Juliet,  it  is  not  necessarily  only  the 
young  who  suffer  the  pains  of  Icwe  aiul  are  ready  to  die 
for  love.  No.  There  is  more  to  it  than  that." 

“I  don’t  understand,"  said  Celia. 

“Not  yet.” 

“Shall  i understand?"  said  Celia. 

“I  think  so,"  said  Poirot,  ‘i  will  tel!  you  what  I think 
happened  and  I will  tell  you  how  1 came  to  think  so. 
The  first  things  that  struck  me  was  the  things  that  were 
not  explained  by  die  evidence  that  the  police  examined. 
Some  things  were  very  commonplace,  were  not  evi- 
dence at  all,  you’d  think.  Among  the  i»s,scs.sion8  of  the 
dead  Margaret  Ravcnscroft,  were  four  wigs.”  He  re- 
peated with  emphasis,  ”Fo«r  wigs,”  He  looked  at 
ZdUe. 

“She  did  not  use  a wig  a!!  the  time,"  said  Zelie,  “Only 
occasionally.  If  she  traveled  or  if  she'd  been  out  and 
got  very  disheveled  and  wanted  to  tidy  herself  in  a hur- 
ry, or  sometimes  idte’d  use  one  dial  wjw  .suitable  for 
cvetting  wear.” 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

“Yes,”  said  Poirot,  “it  was  quite  the  fashion  at  that 
particular  date.  People  certainly  when  they  traveled 
abroad  usually  had  a wig  or  two  wigs.  But  in  her  posses- 
sion were  four  wigs.  Four  wigs  seemed  to  me  rather  a 
lot.  I wondered  why  she  needed  four.  According  to  the 
police  whom  I asked,  it  was-  not  that  she  had  any  ten- 
dency to  baldness.  She  had  the  ordinary  hair  a woman 
of  her  age  would  have  and  in  good  condition.  All  the 
same,  I wondered  about  those.  Qne  of  the  wigs  had  a 
gray  streak  in  it,  I learned  later.  It  was  her  hairdresser 
who  told  me  that.  And  one  of  the  wigs  had  little  curls. 
It  was  the  latter  wig  she  was  wearing  the  day  she  died.” 

“Iff  that  significant  in  any  way?”  asked  Celia.  “She 
might  have  been  wearing  any  of  them.” 

“She  might.  I also  learned  the  housekeeper  told  the 
police  that  she  had  been  wearing  that  particular  wig  al- 
most all  the  time  for  the  last  few  weeks  before  she  died. 
It  appeared  to  be  her  favorite  one.” 

“I  can’t  see — ” 

“There  was  also  a saying  that  Superintendent  Gar- 
roway  quoted  to  me,  ‘Same  man— -different  hat*  It 
gave  me  furiously  to  think.”  ' 

Celia  repeated,  “I  don’t  see—” 

Poirot  said,  “There  was  also  the  evidence  of  the 
dog—” 

“The  dog — what  did  the  dog  do?” 

“The  dog  bit  her.  The  dog  was  said  to  be  devoted  to 
its  mistress,  but  in  the  last  few  weeks  of  her  life,  the  dog 
turned  on  her  more  than  once  and  bit  her  quite 
severely.” 

“Do  you  mean  it  knew  she  was  going  to  commit  sui- 
dde?”  Desmond  stared. 

“No,  something  much  simpler  than  that— ” 

“I  don’t— ” 


ELEPHAMTS  C/W  REMEMBER 

Poirot  went  on— “No,  it  knew  what  no  one  else 
seemed  to  know.  It  knew  she  was  not  its  mistress.  She 
looked  like  its  mistress.  The  housekeeper  who  was 
slightly  blind  and  also  deaf  saw  a woman  who  wore 
Molly  Ravenscroft’s  clothes  and  the  most  recognizable 
of  Molly  Ravenscroft’s  wigs— the  one  with  little  curls 
all  over  the  head.  The  hou.sekceper  said  only  that  her 
mistress  had  been  rather  different  in  her  manner  the 
last  few  weeks  of  her  life.  ‘Same  man— different  hat,’ 
had  been  Garroway’.s  phrase.  And  the  thoiipht—the  con- 
vfction-came  to  me  then.  Santc  wig  dilTercnt  woman. 
The  dog  knew— he  knew  by  what  his  nose  told  iiim.  A 
different  woman,  not  the  woman  he  loved— a woman 
whom  he  disliked  and  feared.  And  1 thought,  suppo.se 
that  woman  was  not  Molly  Ravenscroft— but  who  could 
she  be?  Could  she  be  Dolly-^  the  twin  .sister?” 

“But  that’s  impossible,”  said  Celia. 

**No,  it  was  not  impressible.  After  all,  lemcinbcr,  they 
were  twins.  I must  come  now  to  the  things  tluit  wore 
brought  to  my  notice  by  Mrs.  Oliver.  1 he  things  people 
told  her  or  suggested  to  her.  The  knowlctlge  that  Lady 
Ravcnscroft  had  recently  been  in  luwpital  rrr  in  a nursing 
home  and  that  she  perhaps  had  known  that  she  suf- 
fered front  cancer,  or  thought  that  she  did.  Mctlical  evi- 
dence was  agsiinst  that,  however.  She  still  might  have 
thought  she  did,  but  it  was  not  the  case.  Then  1 learned 
little  by  little  the  early  history  of  her  and  her  twin  sis- 
ter, who  loved  each  other  very  dcvotctlly  as  twins  do, 
did  everything  alike,  wore  clothes  alike,  the  same  things 
seemed  to  happen  to  them,  tey  had  illnesses  at  the  same 
time,  they  married  about  the  same  time  or  not  very  far 
removed  in  time.  And  eventually,  as  many  twins  do,  in- 
stead of  wanting  to  do  everything  in  the  same  fnshton 
Mid  the  same  way,  ^ wanted  to  do  the  itpposite,  To 

226 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

be  as  unlike  each  other  as  they  could.  And  even  between 
them  grew  a certain  amount  of  dislike.  More  than  that. 
There  was  a reason  in  the  past  for  that.  Alistair  Ravens- 
croft  as  a young  man  fell  in  love  with  Dorothea  Pres- 
ton-Grey, the  elder  twin  of  the  two.  But' his  affection 
shifted  to  the  other  sister,  Margaret,  whom  he  married. 
There  was  jealousy  then,  no  doubt,  which  led  to  an 
estrangement  between  the  sisters.  Margaret  continued 
to  be  deeply  attached  to  her  twin,  but  Dorothea  no 
longer  was  devoted  in  any  way  4o  Margaret.  That 
seemed  to  me  to  be  the  e;splanation  of  a great  many 
things.  Dorothea  was  a tragic  figure.  By  noTault  of  her 
own  but  by  some  accident  of  genes,  of  birth,  of  heredi- 
tary characteristics,  she  was  always  mentally  unstable. 
At  quite  an  early  age  she  had,  for  some  reason  which 
has  never  been  made  clear,  a dislike  of  children.  There 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that  a child  came  to  its  death 
through  her  action.  The  evidence  was  not  definite,  but, 
it  was  definite  enough  for  a doctor  to  advise  that  she 
should  have  mental  treatment,  and  she  was  fpr  some 
years  treated  in  a mental  home.  When  reported  cured 
by  doctors,  she  resumed  normal  life,  came  often  to  stay 
with  her  sister  and  went  out  to  India,  at  a time  when 
they  were  stationed  out  there,  to  join  them  there.  And 
there,  again,  an  accident  happened.  A child  of  a nei^- 
bor.  And  again,  although  perhaps  there  was  no.  very 
definite  proof,  it  seems  again  Dorothea  might  have  been 
responsible  ,for  it.  General  Ravenscroft  took  her  home 
to  England  and  she  was  placed  once  more  in  medical 
care.  Once  again  she  appeared  to  be  cured,  and  after 
psychiatric  care  it  was  again  said  that  she  could  go  once 
more  and  resume  a normal  life.  Margaret  believed  this 
time  that  all  would  be  well,  and  thought  that  she  ought 
to  live  with  them  so  that  they  could  watch  closely  for 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


any  signs  of  any  further  mental  disability.  I don’t  think 
that  General  Ravenscroft  approved.  I think  he  had  a 
very  strong  belief  that  just  as  someone  can  be  bom  de- 
formed, spastic  or  crippled  in  some  way,  she  had  a de- 
formity of  the  brain  which  would  recur  from  tinie  to 
time  and  that  she  would  have  to  be  constantly  watched 
and  saved  from  herself  in  case  some  other  tragedy  hap- 
pened.” 

“Are  you  saying,”  asked  Desmond,  “that  it  was  she 
who  shot  both  the  Ravenscrofts?” 

“No,”  said  Poirot,  “that  is  not  my  solution.  I think 
what  happened  was  that  Dorothea  killed  her  sister, 
Margaret.  They  walked  together  on  the  cliff  one  day 
and  Dorothea  pushed  Margaret  over.  The  dormant  ob- 
session of  hatred  and  resentment  of  the  sister  who 
though  so  like  herself,  was  sane  and  healthy,  was  too 
much  for  her.  Hate,  jealousy,  the  desire  to  kill  all  rose 
to  the  surface  and  dominated  her.  I think  that  there  was 
one  outsider  who  knew,  who  was  here  at  the  time  that 
this  happened.  I tliink  you  knew,  Mademoiselle  Zdlie.” 

“Yes,”  said  Z^lie  Meauhourat,  “I  knew.  I was  here 
at  the  time.  The  Ravenscrofts  had  been  worried  about 
her.  That  is  when  they  saw  her  attempt  to  injure  their 
small  son,  Edward.  Edward  was  sent  back  to  school  and 
I and  Celia  went  to  my  pemUmnut.  I came  back  here 
— after  seeing  Celia  settled  in.  Once  the  hou.se  was  emp- 
ty except  for  myself,  General  Ravenscroft  and  Doro- 
hea  and  Margaret,  nobody  had  any  anxiety.  And 
hen  one  day  it  happened.  The  two  sisters  went  out  to- 
gether. Dolly  returned  alone.  She  seemed  in  a very 
queer  and  nervous  state.  She  came  in  and  sat  down  at 
the  tea  table.  It  was  then  General  Ravenscroft  noticed 
that  her  right  hand  was  covered  with  blood.  He  asked 
her  if  she  had  had  a fall.  She  said,  ‘Oh,  no,  it  was  noth- 


228 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

ing.  Nothing  at  all.  I got  scratched  by  a rosebush.’  But 
there  were  no  rosebushes  on  the  Downs.  It  was  a pure- 
ly foolish  remark  and  we  were  worried.  If  she  had 
said  a gorse  bush,  we  might  have  accepted  the  remark. 
General  Ravenscroft  went  out  and  I went  after  Him 
He  kept  saying  as  he  walked,  ‘Something  has  happened 
to  Margaret.  I’m  sure  something  has  happened  to  Mol- 
ly.’ We  found  her  on  a ledge  a little  way  down  the  cliff. 
She  had  been  battered  with  a rock  and  stones.  She  was 
not  dead,  but  she  had  bled!  heavily.  For  a moment  we 
hardly  knew  what  we  could  do.  We  dared  not  move 
her.  We  must  get  a doctor,  we  felt,  at  once,  but  before 
we  could  do  that,  she  clung  to  her  husband,  She  said, 
gasping  for  breath,  ‘Yes,  it  was  Dolly.  She  didn’t  know 
what  she  was  doing.  She  didn’t  know,  Alistair.  You 
mustn’t  let  her  suffer  for  it.  She’s  never  known  the 
things  she  does  or  why.  She  can’t  help  it.  She’s  never 
been  able  to  help  it,  You  must  promise  me,  Alistair.  I 
think  I’m  dying  now.  No — ^no,  we  won’t  have  time  to 
get  a doctor  and  a doctor  couldn’t  do  anything.  I’ve  been 
lying  here  bleeding  to  death- — and  I’m  very  close  to 
death.  1 know  that,  but  promise  me.  Promise  me 
you’ll  save  her.  Promise  me  you  won’t  let  the  police  ar- 
rest her.  Promise  me  that  she’ll  not  be  tried  for  killing 
me,  not  shut  up  for  life  as  a criminal.  Hide  me  some- 
where so  that  my  body  won’t  be  found.  Please,  please, 
it’s  the  last  thing  I ask  you.  You  whom  Hove  more  than 
anything  in  the  world.  If  I could  live  for  you  I would, 
but  I’m  not  going  to  live.  I can  feel  that.  I crawled  a 
little  way,  but  that  was  all  I could  do.  Promise  me.  And 
you,  Z61ie,  you  love  me,  too.  I know.  You’ve  loved  m- 
and  been  good  to  me  and  looked  after  me  always.  An< 
you  loved  the  children,  so  you  must  save  DoUy.  Yoi 
must  save  poor  Dolly.  Please,  please.  For  all  the  love 

229 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


we  have  for  each  other,  Dolly  must  be  saved.’  ” 

“And  then,”  said  Poirot,  “what  did  you  do?  It  seems 
to  me  that  you  must  in  some  way  between  you — 

“Yes.  She  died,  you  know.  She  died  within  about  ten 
minutes  of  those  last  words,  and  I helped  him.  I helped 
him  to  hide  her  body.  It  was  a place  a little  further 
along  the  cliff.  We  carried  her  there  and  there  were 
rocks  and  boulders  and  stones,  and  we  covered  her 
body  as  best  we  could.  Tliere  was  no  path  to  it,  really, 
or  no  way.  You  had  to  scramble.  We  put  her  there.  All 
Alistair  said  again  and  again  was— I promised  her.  I 
must  keep  my  word.  I don’t  know  how  to  do  it.  I don’t 
know  how  anyone  can  save  her.  I don’t  know.  But- 
Well,  we  did  do  it  Dolly  was  in  the  house.  She  was 
irightened,  desperate  with  fright,  but  at  the  same  time 
she  showed  a horrible  kind  of  satisfaction.  She  said,  ‘I 
always  knew.  I’ve  known  for  years  that  Molly  was  really 
evil.  She  took  you  away  from  me,  Alistair.  You  belonged 
to  me— but  she  took  you  away  from  me  and  made  you 
marry  her  and  I always  knew  one  day  I should  get  even 
with  her.  I always  knew.  Now  Pm  frightened.  What’ll 
they  do  to  me— what’ll  they  say?  I can’t  be  shut  up 
again.  I can’t,  T can’t.  I shall  go  mad.  You  won’t  let  me 
be  shut  up.  They’ll  take  me  away  and  they’ll  say  I’tn 
guilty  of  murder.  It  wasn’t  murder.  1 just  had  to  do  it. 
Sometimes  I do  have  to  do  things.  I wanted  to  see  the 
blood,  you  know,  i couldn’t  wait  to  see  Molly  die, 
though.  I ran  away.  But  I knew  she  would  die.  I just 
■'ped  you  wouldn’t  find  her.  She  just  fell  over  the  cliff, 
ople  would  say  it  was  an  accident.’  ” 

“It’s  a horrible  story,”  said  Desmond. 

“Yes,”  said  Celia,  “it’s  a horrible  story,  but  it’s  bet- 
ter to  know.  It’s  better  to  know,  isn’t  it?  I can’t  even  feel 
sorry  for  her.  I mean  for  my  mother.  I know  she  was 
sweet  I know  there  was  never  any  trace  of  evU  in  her 


230 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

— she  was  good  all  through — and  I know,  I can  under- 
stand, why  my  father  didn’t  want  to  marry  Dolly.  He 
wanted  to  marry  my  mother  because  he  loved  her  and 
he  had  found  out  by  then  that  there  was  something 
wrong  with  Dolly.  Something  bad  and  twisted.  But  how 
— how  did  you  do  it  all?” 

“We  told  a good  many  lies,”  said  Z61ie.  “We  hoped 
the  body  would  not  be  found  so  that  later  perhaps  it 
might  be  removed  in  the  night  or  something  like  that 
to  somewhere  where  it  could  look  as  though  she’d  fal- 
len down  into  the  sea.  But  then  we  thought  of  the  sleep- 
walking story.  What  we  had  to  do  was  reaUy  quite  sim- 
ple. Alistair  said,  ‘It’s  frightening,  you  know.  But  I 
promised — swore  to  Molly  when  she  was  dying.  I 
swore  I’d  do  as  she  asked.  There’s  a way,  a possible  way 
to  save  Dolly,  if  only  Dolly  can  do  her  part.  I don’t 
know  if  she’s  capable  of  i^’  I said,  ‘Do  what?’  And  Ali- 
stair said,  ‘Pretend  she’s  Molly  and  that  it’s  Dorothea 
who  walked  in  her  sleep  and  fell  to  her  death.’ 

“We  managed  it.  Took  Dolly  to  an  empty  cottage 
we  knew  of  and  I stayed  with  her  there  for  some  days. 
Alistair  said  Molly  had  been  taken  to  hospital  suffer- 
ing from  shock  after  the  discovery  that  her  sister  had 
fallen  over  the  cliff  while  walking  in  her  sleep  at 
night.  Then  we  brought  DoEy  back — ^brought  her  back 
as  Molly — wearing  MoUy’s  clothes  and  MoUy’s  wig.  I 
got  extra  wigs — the  kind  with  curls,  which  really  did 
disguise  her.  The  dear  old  housekeeper,  Janet,  couldn’t 
see  very  well.  DoUy  and  Molly  were  reaUy  very  much 
alike,  you  know,  and  their  voices  were  alike.  Everyone 
accepted  quite  easUy  that  it  was  MoEy,  behaving  raflier 
peculiarly  now  and  then  because  of  stiE‘  suffering  from 
shock.  It  aE  seemed  quite  natural.  That  was  the  hor- 
rible part  of  it — ” 

“But  how  could  she  keep  it  up?”  asked  CeEa.  “It 


231 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

must  have  been  dreadfully  difficult.” 

“No— she  did  not  find  it  difiicult.  She  had  got,  you 
see,  what  she  wanted— what  she  had  always  wanted. 
She  had  got  Alistair—” 

“But  Alistair — how  could  he  bear  it?” 

“He  told  me  why  and  how — on  the  day  he  had  ar- 
ranged for  me  to  go  back  to  Switzerland.  He  told  me 
what  I had  to  do  and  then  he  told  me  what  he  was  go- 
ing to  do.” 

“He  said;  There  is  only  tme  thing  for  me  to  do.  I 
promised  Margaret  that  1 wouldn’t  hand  Dolly  over  to 
the  police,  that  it  .should  never  be  known  that  she  was 
a murderess,  that  the  children  were  never  to  know  that 
they  had  a murderess  for  an  aunt.  No  one  need  ever 
know  that  Dolly  committed  murder.  She  walked  in  her 
sleep  and  feU  over  the  cliff— a sad  accident  and  she  will 
be  buried  here  in  the  church,  and  muicr  her  own  name.’ 

“ ‘How  can  you  let  that  be  done?’  I asked.  I couldn’t 
bear  it. 

“He  .said:  ‘Because  of  what  I arn  going  to  do — ^you 
have  got  to  know  about  it.’ 

“ ‘You  see,*  he  said,  ‘Dolly  has  to  i>c  stopped  from 
living.  If  she’s  near  children,  shell  take  more  lives— • 
poor  soul;  she’s  not  fit  to  live.  But  you  imist  understand, 
Z61ic,  that  because  of  what  I am  going  to  lio,  1 must 
pay  with  my  own  life,  tix».  I shall  live  here  quietly  for  a 
few  weeks  with  Dolly  playing  the  part  of  my  wife — 
and  then  there  will  be  another  tragedy—’ 

“J  didn’t  understand  what  he  meant,  f said,  ‘Another 
accident?  Sleepwalking  apin?’  And  he  saiti,  *No-  .~whiit 
will  be  known  to  the  world  is  that  I and  Mtdly  have  bi>th 
committed  suicide.  I don’t  supjKWC  the  reason  will  ever 
be  known.  They  may  think  it’s  because  she  was  con- 
vinced she  had  cancer^ — or  that  1 tiiought  so— all  sods 


232 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

of  things  may  be  suggested.  But  you  see — you  must 
help  me,  Zelie.  You  are  the  only  person  who  really 
loves  me  and  loves  MoUy  and  loves  the  children.  If  Dol- 
ly has  got  to  die,  I am  the  only  person  who  must  do  it. 
She  won’t  be  unhappy  or  frightened.  I shall  shoot  her 
and  then  myself.  Her  fingerprints  will  show  on  the  re- 
volver because  she  handled  it  not  long  ago,  and  minp 
will  be  there  too.  Justice  has  to  be  done  and  I have  to 
be  the  executioner.  The  thing  I want  you  to  know  is  that 
I did — ^that  I still  do — love  them  both.  MoUy  more  than 
my  life.  Dolly  because  I pity  her  so  much  for  what  she 
was  bom  to  be.’  He  said,  ‘Always  remember  that — ' ” 

Z61ie  rose  and  came  towards  Celia.  “Now  you  know  the 
truth,”  she  said.  “I  promised  your  father  that  you  should 
never  know.  I have  broken  my  word.  I never  meant  to 
reveal  it  to  you  or  to  anyone  else.  Monsieur  Poirot 
made  me  feel  differently.  But — ^it’s  such  a horrible 
story — 

“I  understand  how  you  felt,”  said  Celia.  “Perhaps 
you  were  right  from  your  point  of  view,  but  I — am 
glad  to  know,  because  now  a great  burden  seems  to 
have  been  lifted  off  me — ” 

“Because  now,”  said  Desmond,  “we  both  know.  And 
it’s  something  we’ll  never  mind  about  knowing.  It  was  a 
tragedy.  As  Monsieur  Poirot  here  has  said,  it  was  a real 
tragedy  of  two  people  who  loved  each  other.  But  they 
didn’t  kill  each  other,  because  they  loved  each  other. 
One  was  murdered  and  the  other  executed  a murderer 
for  the  sake  of  humanity  so  that  more  children  shouldn’t 
suffer.  One  can  forgive  him  if  he  was  wrong,  but  I 
don’t  think  it  was  wrong,  realy.” 

“She  was  a frightening  woman  always,”  said  Celia. 
“Even  when  I was  a dhild  I was  fei^tened  of  her,  but 


233 


ELEI>HANTS  CAH  REMEMBER 


T didn’t  know  why.  But  I do  know  why  now.  I think  my 
father  was  a brave  man  to  do  what  he  did.  He  did 
what  my  mother  asked  iiini  to  do,  Iiegged  him  to  do  with 
her  dying  breath.  He  saved  her  twin  .si.stcr,  whom  I think 
she’d  alwiiys  loved  very  dearly.  1 like  to  think — oh,  it 
seems  a silly  thing  for  me  to  .say — ” .she  looked  doubt- 
fully at  Hcrcule  Poirot.  “Perhaps  you  won’t  think  so.  I 
expect  you’re  a C’atholie,  but  it’s  what's  written  on  their 
tombstone.  ‘In  death  they  were  not  divideti.’  ft  doesn’t 
mean  that  they  died  together,  but  I think  they  are  to- 
gether. I think  they  came  together  afterwards.  Two  peo- 
ple who  loved  each  other  very  much,  and  my  poor  aunt 
whom  I’ll  try  to  feel  more  kindly  about  than  1 ever  did 
— my  poor  aunt  didn’t  have  to  suiTcr  for  what  she 
couldn’t  perhaps  help  herself  doing.  Mind  you,”  said 
Celia,  suddenly  breaking  into  her  ordinary  everyday 
voice,  “she  wasn’t  a nice  perstm.  You  can’t  help  not 
liking  people  if  they’re  not  nice  people.  I’crhaps  she 
could  have  been  different  if  she  tried,  hut  perhaps  she 
couldn’t.  And  if  so,  one  has  to  think  of  her  as  someone 
who  was  very  ill— like  .somebody,  for  instance,  who  had 
plague  in  a village  and  they  wouklii’t  let  her  go  out  or 
feed  her  and  she  couldn't  go  amotjg  other  people  be- 
cause the  whole  village  would  hsivc  died.  .Something 
like  that.  But  I’ll  try  and  be  sorry  for  her.  And  my  moth- 
er and  father — 1 don’t  worry  about  them  any  more. 
They  loved  each  other  so  much,  and  loved  poor,  un- 
happy, hating  Etolly.” 

“I  think,  Celia,”  .said  Dc.snt«riid,  “we'd  better  get 
aarried  now  as  soon  as  possible,  I can  tel!  you  one 
hing.  My  modier  is  never  going  to  hear  anything 
bout  this.  She’s  not  my  own  mother  and  slie's  not  a per- 
son I can  trust  with  thb  sort  of  .secret.” 

‘‘Your  adopted  irtitijer,  Dcsmoiul,"  stiid  Boirot.  “I 
have  good  reason  to  believe  wa.s  anxious  to  come  be- 


214 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


tween  you  and  Celia  and,  tried  to  influence  you  in  the 
idea  that  from  her  mother  and  father  she  might  have 
inherited  some  terrible  characteristic.  But  you  know,  or 
you  may  not  know  and  I see  no  reason  why  I should  not 
tell  you,  you  will  inherit  from  the  woman  who  was  your 
real  mother  and  who  died  not  very  long  ago  leaving 
all  her  money  to  you.  You  will  inherit  a very  large  sum 
when  you  reach  the  age  of  twenty-five.” 

“If  I marry  Celia,  of  course  we  shall  need  the  money 
to  live  on,”  said  Desmond.  “I  quite  understand.  I 
know  my  present  adopted  mother  is  very  keen  on  money 
and  I often  lend  her  money  even  now.  She  suggested 
my  seeing  a lawyer  the  other  day  because  she  said  it 
was  very  dangerous  now  that  I was  over  twenty-one, 
not  leaving  a will  behind  me.  I suppose  she  thought  she’d 
get  the  money.  I had  thought  of  probably  leaving  nearly 
aU  the  money  to  her.  But  of  course  now  Celia  and  I are 
getting  married  I shall  leave  it  to  Celia^ — and  I didn’t 
like  the  way  my  mother  tried  to  put  me  against  Celia.” 

“I  think  your  suspicions  are  entirely  correct,”  said 
Poirot.  “I  dare  say  she  could  teU  herself  that  she  meant 
it  all  for  the  best,  that  Celia’s  origin  is  something  that 
you  ought  to  know  if  there  is  a risk  for  you  to  take, 
but--” 

“All  right,”  said  Desmond,  “but— I know  I’m  being 
unkind.  After  all,  she  adopted  me  and  brought  me  up 
and  all  the  rest  of  it,  and  I dare  say  if  there’s  enough 
money  I can  settle  some  of  it  on  her.  Celia  and  I mil 
have  the  rest  and  we’re  going  to  be  happy  together.  Af- 
ter all,  there  are  things  that’ll  make  us  feel  sad  from 
time  to  time,  but  we  shan’t  worry  any  more,  shall  we, 
Celia?” 

“No,”  said  Celia,  “we’ll  never ^orry  again.  I think 
they  were  rather  splendid  people,  my  mother  and  father. 
Motiier  fried  to  look  after  her  sister  aU  her  life,  but  I 

235 

• i 


ELEPHAHTS  CAN  REMEMBER 

suppose  it  was  a bit  too  hopeless.  You  can’t  stop  people 

from  being  like  they  are.”  _ 

“Ah,  dear  children,”  said  Zdite.  “Forgive  me  for  call- 
ing ymi  children,  because  you  are  not.  You  arc  a grown 
man  and  woman.  I know  that.  I am  so  pleased  to 
have  seen  you  apin  and  to  know  I have  not  done  any 
harm  in  what  1 did.” 

“You  haven’t  done  any  harm  at  all  and  it’s  lovely 
seeing  you,  dear  Zdlie.”  Celia  went  to  her  and  hugged 
her.  “I’ve  always  been  terribly  fond  of  yon,”  she  said. 

"And  I wjus  very  fond  of  you,  too,  when  1 knew  you,” 
said  Desmond.  “When  1 lived  next  door.  You  had  love- 
ly games  you  played  with  us.” 

The  two  young  people  turned. 

‘Thank  you,  Mrs.  Oliver,”  said  Desmond.  “You’ve 
been  very  kind  and  you’ve  put  in  a lot  of  work.  I can 
see  that.  Thank  you.  Monsieur  Poirot.” 

“Yes,  thank  you,”  said  Celia.  'Tm  very  grateful.” 

They  walked  away  and  the  others  looked  after  them. 

“Well,”  said  TMit,  “I  must  leave  now."  She  said  to 
Poirot,  ‘Vhat  about  you?  Will  you  have  to  tell  anyone 

about  this?”  _ 

“There  is  one  person  I might  tell  in  confidence.  A 
retired  police  force  officer.  lie  i.s  no  longer  actively  in 
the  Service  now.  He  is  completely  rcliretl.  I think  he 
would  not  fee!  it  is  his  duty  to  interfere  with  what  time 
has  now  wiped  out.  W he  was  still  in  active  service,  it 
might  be  different." 

“It’s  a terrible  story,"  said  Mr.s.  Oliver,  “terrible.  And 
all  those  {icoplc  I talked  to— yes,  1 can  sec  now,  they 
all  remembered  something.  Sknnething  that  was  useful 
in  showing  us  what  die  truth  wa.s,  although  it  was  dif- 
ficult to  put  together.  Except  for  Monsieur  Poirot,  who 
can  always  put  things  together  out  of  the  most  extra- 
ordittary  things.  Like  wigs  and  twins." 

236 


ELEPHANTS  CAN  REMEMBER 


Poirot  walked  across  to  where  Zelie  was  standing 
looking  out  over  the  view. 

“You  do  not  blame  me,”  he  said,  “for  coming  to  you, 
persuading  you  to  do  what  you  have  done?” 

“No.  I am  glad.  You  have  been  right.  They  are  very 
charming,  those  two,  and  they  are  well  suited,  I think. 
They  will  be  happy.  We  are  standing  here  where  two 
lovers  once  lived.  Where  two  lovers  died,  and  I don’t 
blame  him  for  what  he  did.  It  may  have  been  wrong,  I 
suppose  it  was  wrong,  but  I can’t  blame  him.  I think  it 
was  a brave  act  even  if  it  was  a wrong  one.” 

“You  loved  him  too,  did  you  not?”  said  Hercule  Poi- 
rot. 

“Yes.  Always.  As  soon  as  I came  to  the  house.  I 
loved  him  dearly.  I don’t  think  he  knew  it.  There  was 
never  anything,  what  you  call,  between  us.  He  trusted 
me  and  was  fond  of  me.  I loved  them  both.  Both  he 
and  Margaret.” 

“There  is  something  I would  like  to  ask  you.  He 
loved  Dolly  as  well  as  Molly,  didn’t  he?” 

“Right  up  to  the  end.  He  loved  them  both.  And  that’s 
why  he  was  willing  to  save  Dolly.  Why  Molly  wanted 
him  to.  Which  did  he  love  the  best  of  those  sisters?  I 
wonder.  That  is  a tiling  I shall  perhaps  never  know,” 
said  Z61ic.  “I  never  did — perhaps  I never  shall.” 

Poirot  looked  at  her  for  a moment,  then  turned  away. 
He  rejoined  Mrs.  Oliver. 

“We  will  drive  back  to  London.  We  must -return  to 
everyday  life,  forget  tragedies  and  love  affairs.” 

“Elephants  can  remember,”  said  Mrs.  Oliver,  “but 
we  arc  human  beings,  and  mercifully  human  beings  can 
forget.” 


Introducing  Dell’s  New 
Mystery  Series  m 


SelcYtcdbvXarcsr.BK5U<;r. 
ovvncrof  ihf  Murder  lirk^ 
bookstore  m New  York  C 


□ DEATHINTHEMORNING  ni78W^' 

Q THE  BRANDENBURG  HOTEL  S:2  25  H 0875  6^ 

by  Pauline  Glen  Winslow 52.25  (108/5-6) 

(157a«) 

□ THE  RED  HOUSE  MYSTERY  by  A.  A.  Milne  $2.25  (1 7376-0) 

□ THEMINUTEMAN  MURDERS  (18994-2) 

□ MYFOE  OUTSTRETCH’D  BENEATH  fiSSSS-SI 

THETREEbyVC.CIinton-Baddelay S2.25  ( oG8o  8) 

□ GUIU  EDGED  by  WJ.  Burley S2-2S  J 3082-_) 

□ COPPEBGOLP'by  Paulina  Glen  Wirislow  ,,$2,25  (11130-7) 

□ MANYDEADLYRETURNS  (16172-X) 

OMcGARRATTHEDUBUNHORSESHOW 


by  Bartholomew  Gill  ....... 


..$2.25  (15379-4) 


With  over  350  million  copies  of  her  books  sold,  Agatha 
Christie  continues  to  enthrall  readers  with  ingenious  tales 
such  as  these  Dell  editions: 


such  as  these  Dell  editions: 

n APPOIN  TMEN'r  WITH  DEATH (16780-9) 

□ ri  IE  BOOMERANG  CLUE .$1.95  (10704-0) 

O CARDS  ON  THE  TABLE 52.25  (11052-1) 

QDEAD  MAN’S  MIRROR 51.95  (H699-6) 

-ei  ELEPHAm  S CAN  REMEMBER 5155  (1,2329-1) 

□ GOLDEN  BALL  & OTHER  STORIES (13272-X) 

□ MANINTIIEBROWNSUIT  ....52.25  (15230-5) 

□ MR.  PARKER  PYNE,  DETECTIVE 52.25  (15888-5) 

□ MURDER  AETER  HOURS ...........515S  (15922-9) 

□ MURDER  IN  RETROSPECT 5225  (16030-8) 

□ norm? 51.95  (16254-8) 

□ PARTNERS  IN  CRIME ■$274  (16848-1) 

□ THE  RAGAITA  MYS'TERY 5155  (17336-1) 

□ SECRET  OF  CHIMNEYS 5155  (17708-1) 

aSPIAK  OF  THE  DEVIL 5225  (17654-9) 

D THERE  IS  A TIDE 5155  (18692-7) 

GTO  CI  .UES  FOR  MISS  MARPLE 5155  (18755-9) 

□ THREE  BLIND  MICE  & OTHER  STORIES 5225  (15867-2) 

OTOlSDAVa.UB  MURDERS 5155  (19136-X) 

DWri’NESS  FOR  THE  PROSECUTION 5225  (19619-1) 


KILBOCHCS 

•X^  M BOX  1000.  PWE  BROOK.  N.JL  07058 


Pteii«  send  th©  I have  qhecked  above.  I am  ©noioshig  $ — | 

inclwclmg  75®  for  first  book,  25®  for  each  additional  book  up  to  $1.60  maximum  , j 

jWrtteftandhandWnQbharge.  | 

f iifind  chock  or  money  order—no  cash  or  C.O,Da  P/ease  $How  up  to  6 weeks  for  , 

dfrfiveiy  ' ' ' j 


Sckviul  K Kutii  \V  iiuilckli. 

5 i'l*'  VVIK'  -t  M i lie 

< nmeB.  ‘.»k  Sli^'i'ni  Sbmthtn 
( )aks,(’,!lit'orn»a- 


■ S€gSs®f 

T8ECEIME 


□ DEATH  ON  THE  HIGH  CS 

by  Robert  Barnard 
O WINKING  AT  THE  BRIH 
Gladys  Mitchell 


(119004) 
..$2.25  (193264) 


gm  Rasittwwiio«(,»io?»M 


%««  fi»ml «» ti«  Mm  I imm  I m i 

7i*  tm  ttti  fliit  W to  tooel  i#  » |I,M  ttviMtewn 

»«ip  »«  hiiwlfci  cliiifi, 

»ftd  etiti;k  m CjDJSj.  0k»w  m II  w««to  to 


On  a ragQ€!<^  overlW^iifg 
loveirs  had  walked . . ^id  died  v| 
last  iapinent§  shrtHKfld  in  niysl^i?  C>©(^dp|; 
I4cn  lovely,  young  Ce,|a  R|^vpnscr6ft^  lil^i;: 
and  love-hung  on  thpse.  hiotnents,’^3C)^ 
bui  led  in  the’dusl  of  |Mie.  Had  her  pajrlri^l^ 
really  been  suicideft-or  had  t|icy  l^esi 

'-fniftl^l^i.U'ctered? . ' ■ „ 

The  inc6nir«i^ibkJ  Hercule  fk>irQt  follpW0: 
twisted  clues  acTnss  thfce^cont4|ients  a.M 
dc)Wh  ditnly  lit  (.(>r;ridp|^  (if  riH^iffilyy  to  splv^;^ 
,puzzl4lhat  ha(|mi|it)rotn  the  past  to  fin  fife 
' of'  inadnessm'ur'lj^ 

' tnenacti  of  death.' 


I 


’!►  ' 1*"^  I * *'■/ , 

ovr.R  5Sh  M II .1  .Kin  ( ciri i ;s  cn  ‘ i ifR  i 

HAVE  Rfd-'fi  ntii.i). 

WKn^RKbrsitr  iias.vi|J^  wt:  Diwnofi 
A mST  Aiibicnt  i:  g,iA!  in  l AncINArTt) 
iiEK  uncQUAi  1 r>  t ONMAni)  in  riii;  keAt 
Awi)  'lAi  n.  t;i  iiijjncj  sEinren. 


