The Project Gutenberg eBook of The mysterious Mr. Quin
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The mysterious Mr. Quin

Author: Agatha Christie


        
Release date: March 1, 2026 [eBook #78084]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Bantam Books, 1930

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78084

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MYSTERIOUS MR. QUIN ***





                        The Mysterious Mr. Quin

                            Agatha Christie

            _Copyright 1930 by Dodd, Mead & Company, Inc._
        _Copyright © renewed 1958 by Agatha Christie Mallowan._




                               CONTENTS


                        THE COMING OF MR. QUIN
                        THE SHADOW ON THE GLASS
                        AT THE BELLS AND MOTLEY
                        THE SIGN IN THE SKY
                        THE SOUL OF THE CROUPIER
                        THE WORLD'S END
                        THE VOICE IN THE DARK
                        THE FACE OF HELEN
                        THE DEAD HARLEQUIN
                        THE BIRD WITH THE BROKEN WING
                        THE MAN FROM THE SEA
                        HARLEQUIN'S LANE




                        THE MYSTERIOUS MR. QUIN




                        THE COMING OF MR. QUIN


It was New Year's Eve. The elder members of the house party at Royston
were assembled in the big hall.

Mr. Satterthwaite was glad that the young people had gone to bed. He
was not fond of young people in herds. He thought them uninteresting
and crude. They lacked subtlety and as life went on he had become
increasingly fond of subtleties.

Mr. Satterthwaite was sixty-two--a little bent, dried-up man with a
peering face oddly elflike, and an intense and inordinate interest in
other people's lives. All his life, so to speak, he had sat in the
front row of the stalls watching various dramas of human nature unfold
before him. His role had always been that of the onlooker. Only now,
with old age holding him in its clutch, he found himself increasingly
critical of the drama submitted to him. He demanded now something a
little out of the common.

There was no doubt that he had a flair for these things. He knew
instinctively when the elements of drama were at hand. Like a war
horse, he sniffed the scent. Since his arrival at Royston this
afternoon, that strange inner sense of his had stirred and bid him be
ready. Something interesting was happening or going to happen.

The house party was not a large one. There was Tom Evesham, their
genial good-humored host, and his serious political wife, who had been
before her marriage Lady Laura Keene. There was Sir Richard Conway,
soldier, traveler, and sportsman, there were six or seven young people
whose names Mr. Satterthwaite had not grasped, and there were the
Portals.

It was the Portals who interested Mr. Satterthwaite.

He had never met Alec Portal before but he knew all about him, had
known his father and his grandfather. Alec Portal ran pretty true to
type. He was a man of close on forty, fair-haired, and blue-eyed like
all the Portals, fond of sport, good at games, devoid of imagination.
Nothing unusual about Alec Portal. The usual good, sound English stock.

But his wife was different. She was, Mr. Satterthwaite knew, an
Australian. Portal had been out in Australia two years ago, had met her
out there, and had married her and brought her home. She had never been
to England previous to her marriage. All the same, she wasn't at all
like any other Australian woman Mr. Satterthwaite had met.

He observed her now covertly. Interesting woman--very. So still, and
yet so--alive. Alive! That was just it! Not exactly beautiful--no, you
wouldn't call her beautiful, but there was a kind of calamitous magic
about her that you couldn't miss--that no man could miss. The masculine
side of Mr. Satterthwaite spoke there, but the feminine side (for Mr.
Satterthwaite had a large share of femininity), was equally interested
in another question: Why did Mrs. Portal dye her hair?

No other man would probably have known that she dyed her hair, but Mr.
Satterthwaite knew. He knew all those things. And it puzzled him. Many
dark women dye their hair blond; he had never before come across a fair
woman who dyed her hair black.

Everything about her intrigued him. In a queer intuitive way, he felt
certain that she was either very happy or very unhappy--but he didn't
know which, and it annoyed him not to know. Furthermore, there was the
curious effect she had upon her husband.

_He adores her_, said Mr. Satterthwaite to himself, _but sometimes
he's--yes, afraid of her! That's very interesting. That's uncommonly
interesting._

Portal drank too much. That was certain. And he had a curious way of
watching his wife when she wasn't looking.

_Nerves_, said Mr. Satterthwaite. _The fellow's all nerves. She knows
it too, but she won't do anything about it._

He felt very curious about the pair of them. Something was going on
that he couldn't fathom.

He was roused from his meditations on the subject by the solemn chiming
of a big clock.

"Twelve o'clock," said Evesham. "New Year's Day. Happy New
Year--everybody. As a matter of fact, that clock's five minutes fast. I
don't know why the children wouldn't wait up and see the New Year in."

"I don't suppose for a minute they've really gone to bed," said his
wife placidly. "They're probably putting hairbrushes or something in
our beds. That sort of thing does so amuse them. I can't think why. We
should never have been allowed to do such a thing in my young day."

"_Autre temps, autre moeurs_," said Conway, smiling.

He was a tall soldierly-looking man. Both he and Evesham were much of
the same type--honest, upright, kindly men with no great pretensions to
brains.

"In my young days we all joined hands in a circle and sang 'Auld Lang
Syne,'" continued Lady Laura. "'Should auld acquaintance be forgot'--so
touching, I always think the words are."

Evesham moved uneasily. "Oh! drop it, Laura," he muttered. "_Not here!_"

He strode across the wide hall where they were sitting, and switched on
an extra light.

"Very stupid of me," said Lady Laura, _sotto voce_. "Reminds him of
poor Mr. Capel, of course. My dear, is the fire too hot for you?"

Eleanor Portal had made a brusque movement. "Thank you. I'll move my
chair back a little."

What a lovely voice she had--one of those low, murmuring, echoing
voices that stay in your memory, thought Mr. Satterthwaite. Her face
was in shadow now. What a pity.

From her place in the shadow she spoke again. "Mr.--Capel?"

"Yes. The man who originally owned this house. He shot himself, you
know. Oh! very well, Tom dear, I won't speak of it unless you like.
It was a great shock for Tom, of course, because he was here when it
happened. So were you, weren't you, Sir Richard?"

"Yes, Lady Laura."

An old grandfather clock in the corner groaned, wheezed, snorted
asthmatically, and then struck twelve.

"Happy New Year," grunted Evesham perfunctorily.

Lady Laura wound up her knitting with some deliberation. "Well, we've
seen the New Year in," she observed, and added, looking toward Mrs.
Portal, "What do you think, my dear?"

Eleanor Portal rose quickly to her feet. "Bed, by all means," she said
lightly.

_She's very pale_, thought Mr. Satterthwaite, as he too rose, and began
busying himself with candlesticks. _She's not usually as pale as that._

He lighted her candle and handed it to her with a funny little
old-fashioned bow. She took it from him with a word of acknowledgment,
and went slowly up the stairs.

Suddenly a very odd impulse swept over Mr. Satterthwaite. He wanted to
go after her--to reassure her--he had the strangest feeling that she
was in danger of some kind. The impulse died down, and he felt ashamed.
_He_ was getting nervy too.

She hadn't looked at her husband as she went up the stairs, but now she
turned her head over her shoulder and gave him a long, searching glance
which had a queer intensity in it. It affected Mr. Satterthwaite very
oddly.

He found himself saying good night to his hostess in quite a flustered
manner.

"I'm sure I hope it _will_ be a happy New Year," Lady Laura was saying.
"But the political situation seems to me to be fraught with grave
uncertainty."

"I'm sure it is," said Mr. Satterthwaite earnestly. "I'm sure it is."

"I only hope," continued Lady Laura, without the least change of
manner, "that it will be a dark man who first crosses the threshold.
You know that superstition, I suppose, Mr. Satterthwaite? No? You
surprise me. To bring luck to the house it must be a dark man who first
steps over the door step on New Year's Day. Dear me, I hope I shan't
find anything _very_ unpleasant in my bed. I never trust the children.
They have such very high spirits."

Shaking her head in sad foreboding, Lady Laura moved majestically up
the staircase.

With the departure of the women, chairs were pulled in closer round the
blazing logs on the big open hearth.

"Say when," said Evesham, hospitably, as he held up the whisky decanter.

When everybody had said when, the talk reverted to the subject which
had been tabooed before.

"You knew Derek Capel, didn't you, Satterthwaite?" asked Conway.

"Slightly--yes."

"And you, Portal?"

"No, I never met him."

So fiercely and defensively did he say it that Mr. Satterthwaite looked
up in surprise.

"I always hate it when Laura brings up the subject," said Evesham
slowly. "After the tragedy, you know, this place was sold to a big
manufacturer fellow. He cleared out after a year--didn't suit him or
something. A lot of tommyrot was talked about the place being haunted,
of course, and it gave the house a bad name. Then, when Laura got me to
stand for West Kidleby, of course it meant living up in these parts,
and it wasn't so easy to find a suitable house. Royston was going
cheap, and--well, in the end I bought it. Ghosts are all tommyrot,
but all the same one doesn't exactly care to be reminded that you're
living in a house where one of your own friends shot himself. Poor old
Derek--we shall never know why he did it."

"He won't be the first or the last fellow who's shot himself without
being able to give a reason," said Alec Portal heavily.

He rose and poured himself out another drink, splashing the whisky in
with a liberal hand.

_There's something very wrong with him_, said Mr. Satterthwaite, to
himself. _Very wrong indeed. I wish I knew what it was all about._

"Gad!" said Conway. "Listen to the wind. It's a wild night."

"A good night for ghosts to walk," said Portal with a reckless laugh.
"All the devils in hell are abroad tonight."

"According to Lady Laura, even the blackest of them would bring us
luck," observed Conway, with a laugh. "Hark to that!"

The wind rose in another terrific wail, and as it died away there came
three loud knocks on the big nailed doorway.

Everyone started.

"Who on earth can that be at this time of night?" cried Evesham.

They stared at each other.

"I will open it," said Evesham. "The servants have gone to bed."

He strode across to the door, fumbled a little over the heavy bars, and
finally flung it open. An icy blast of wind came sweeping into the hall.

Framed in the doorway stood a man's figure, tall and slender. To Mr.
Satterthwaite, watching, he appeared, by some curious effect of the
stained glass above the door, to be dressed in every color of the
rainbow. Then, as he stepped forward, he showed himself to be a thin
dark man.

"I must really apologize for this intrusion," said the stranger, in
a pleasant, level voice. "But my car broke down. Nothing much, my
chauffeur is putting it to rights, but it will take half an hour or so,
and it is so confoundedly cold outside--"

He broke off, and Evesham took up the thread quickly.

"I should think it was. Come in and have a drink. We can't give you any
assistance about the car, can we?"

"No, thanks. My man knows what to do. By the way, my name is
Quin--Harley Quin."

"Sit down, Mr. Quin," said Evesham. "Sir Richard Conway, Mr.
Satterthwaite, Mr. Portal. My name is Evesham."

Mr. Quin acknowledged the introductions, and dropped into the chair
that Evesham had hospitably pulled forward. As he sat, some effect of
the firelight threw a bar of shadow across his face which gave almost
the impression of a mask.

Evesham threw a couple more logs on the fire. "A drink?"

"Thanks."

Evesham brought it to him and asked as he did so, "Do you know this
part of the world well, Mr. Quin?"

"I passed through it some years ago."

"Really?"

"Yes. This house belonged then to a man called Capel."

"Ah! yes," said Evesham. "Poor Derek Capel. You knew him?"

"Yes, I knew him."

Evesham's manner underwent a faint change, almost imperceptible to one
who had not studied the English character. Before, it had contained
a subtle reserve; now this was laid aside. Mr. Quin had known Derek
Capel. He was the friend of a friend, and as such, was vouched for and
fully accredited.

"Astounding affair, that," he said confidentially. "We were just
talking about it. I can tell you, it went against the grain, buying
this place. If there had been anything else suitable, but there
wasn't. You see, I was in the house the night he shot himself--so was
Conway--and upon my word, I've always expected his ghost to walk."

"A very inexplicable business," said Mr. Quin, slowly and deliberately,
and he paused with the air of an actor who has just spoken an important
cue.

"You may well say inexplicable," burst in Conway. "The thing's a black
mystery--always will be."

"I wonder," said Mr. Quin, noncommittally. "Yes, Sir Richard, you were
saying?"

"Astounding--that's what it was. Here's a man in the prime of life,
gay, lighthearted, without a care in the world. Five or six old pals
staying with him. Top of his spirits at dinner, full of plans for the
future. And from the dinner table he goes straight upstairs to his
room, takes a revolver from a drawer, and shoots himself. Why? Nobody
ever knew. Nobody ever will know."

"Isn't that rather a sweeping statement, Sir Richard?" asked Mr. Quin,
smiling.

Conway stared at him. "What d'you mean? I don't understand."

"A problem is not necessarily unsolvable because it has remained
unsolved."

"Oh! Come, man, if nothing came out at the time, it's not likely to
come out now--ten years afterward?"

Mr. Quin shook his head gently. "I disagree with you. The evidence of
history is against you. The contemporary historian never writes such a
true history as the historian of a later generation. It is a question
of getting the true perspective, of seeing things in proportion. If
you like to call it so, it is, like everything else, a question of
relativity."

Alec Portal leaned forward, his face twitching painfully.

"You are right, Mr. Quin," he cried, "you are right. Time does not
dispose of a question--it only presents it anew in a different guise."

Evesham was smiling tolerantly. "Then you mean to say, Mr. Quin, that
if we were to hold, let us say, a court of inquiry, tonight, into the
circumstances of Derek Capel's death, we are as likely to arrive at the
truth as we should have been at the time?"

"_More_ likely, Mr. Evesham. The personal equation has largely dropped
out, and you will remember facts as facts without seeking to put your
own interpretation upon them."

Evesham frowned doubtfully.

"One must have a starting point, of course," said Mr. Quin in his quiet
level voice. "A starting point is usually a theory. One of you must
have a theory, I am sure. How about you, Sir Richard?"

Conway frowned thoughtfully. "Well, of course," he said apologetically,
"we thought--naturally we all thought--that there must be a woman in
it somewhere. It's usually either that or money, isn't it? And it
certainly wasn't money. No trouble of that description. So--what else
could it have been?"

Mr. Satterthwaite started. He had leaned forward to contribute a small
remark of his own and, in the act of doing so, he had caught sight of
a woman's figure crouched against the balustrade of the gallery above.
She was huddled down against it, invisible from everywhere but where he
himself sat, and she was evidently listening with strained attention to
what was going on below. So immovable was she that he hardly believed
the evidence of his own eyes.

But he recognized the pattern of the dress easily enough--an old-world
brocade. It was Eleanor Portal.

And suddenly all the events of the night seemed to fall into
pattern--Mr. Quin's arrival, no fortuitous chance, but the appearing of
an actor when his cue was given. There was a drama being played in the
big hall at Royston tonight--a drama none the less real in that one of
the actors was dead. Oh! yes, Derek Capel had a part in the play. Mr.
Satterthwaite was sure of that.

And, again suddenly, a new illumination came to him. This was Mr.
Quin's doing. It was he who was staging the play--was giving the actors
their cues. He was at the heart of the mystery pulling the strings,
making the puppets work. He knew everything, even to the presence of
the woman crouched against the woodwork upstairs. Yes, he knew.

Sitting well back in his chair, secure in his role of audience, Mr.
Satterthwaite watched the drama unfold before his eyes. Quietly and
naturally, Mr. Quin was pulling the strings, setting his puppets in
motion.

"A woman--yes," he murmured thoughtfully. "There was no mention of any
woman at dinner?"

"Why, of course," cried Evesham. "He announced his engagement. That's
just what made it seem so absolutely mad. Very bucked about it he was.
Said it wasn't to be announced just yet--but gave us the hint that he
was in the running for the Benedick stakes."

"Of course we all guessed who the lady was," said Conway. "Marjorie
Dilke. Nice girl."

It seemed to be Mr. Quin's turn to speak, but he did not do so, and
something about his silence seemed oddly provocative. It was as though
he challenged the last statement. It had the effect of putting Conway
in a defensive position.

"Who else could it have been? Eh, Evesham?"

"I don't know," said Tom Evesham slowly. "What did he say exactly now?
Something about being in the running for the Benedick stakes--that he
couldn't tell us the lady's name till he had her permission--it wasn't
to be announced yet. He said, I remember, that he was a damned lucky
fellow. That he wanted his two old friends to know that by that time
next year he'd be a happy married man. Of course, we assumed it was
Marjorie. They were great friends and he'd been about with her a lot."

"The only thing--" began Conway and stopped.

"What were you going to say, Dick?"

"Well, I mean, it was odd in a way, if it was Marjorie, that the
engagement shouldn't be announced at once. I mean, why the secrecy?
Sounds more as though it were a married woman--you know, someone whose
husband had just died, or who was divorcing him."

"That's true," said Evesham. "If that were the case, of course the
engagement couldn't be announced at once. And you know, thinking back
about it, I don't believe he had been seeing much of Marjorie. All that
was the year before. I remember thinking things seemed to have cooled
off between them."

"Curious," said Mr. Quin.

"Yes--looked almost as though someone had come between them."

"Another woman," said Conway thoughtfully.

"By Jove," said Evesham. "You know, there was something almost
indecently hilarious about old Derek that night. He looked almost drunk
with happiness. And yet--I can't quite explain what I mean--but he
looked oddly defiant too."

"Like a man defying Fate," said Alec Portal heavily.

Was it of Derek Capel he was speaking--or was it of himself? Mr.
Satterthwaite, looking at him, inclined to the latter view. Yes, that
was what Alec Portal represented--a man defying Fate. His imagination,
muddled by drink, responded suddenly to that note in the story which
recalled his own secret preoccupation.

Mr. Satterthwaite looked up. She was still there. Watching,
listening--still motionless, frozen--like a dead woman.

"Perfectly true," said Conway. "Capel _was_ excited--curiously so. I'd
describe him as a man who has staked heavily and won against well-nigh
overwhelming odds."

"Getting up courage, perhaps, for what he's made up his mind to do?"
suggested Portal. And as though moved by an association of ideas, he
got up and helped himself to another drink.

"Not a bit of it," said Evesham sharply. "I'd almost swear nothing of
that kind was in his mind. Conway's right. A successful gambler who
has brought off a long shot and can hardly believe in his own good
fortune. That was the attitude."

Conway gave a gesture of discouragement. "And yet," he said, "ten
minutes later--"

They sat in silence. Evesham brought his hand down with a bang on the
table. "Something must have happened in that ten minutes," he cried.
"It must! But what? Let's go over it carefully. We were all talking. In
the middle of it Capel got up suddenly and left the room--"

"Why?" said Mr. Quin.

The interruption seemed to disconcert Evesham. "I beg your pardon?"

"I only said, 'Why?'" said Mr. Quin.

Evesham frowned in an effort of memory. "It didn't seem vital--at the
time. Oh! of course--the post. Don't you remember that jangling bell,
and how excited we were? We'd been snowed up for three days, remember.
Biggest snowstorm for years and years. All the roads were impassable.
No newspapers, no letters. Capel went out to see if something had
come through at last, and got a great pile of things, newspapers and
letters. He opened the paper to see if there was any news, and then
went upstairs with his letters. Three minutes afterward, we heard a
shot. Inexplicable--absolutely inexplicable."

"That's not inexplicable," said Portal. "Of course the fellow got some
unexpected news in a letter. Obvious, I should have said."

"Oh! Don't think we missed anything so obvious as that. It was one
of the Coroner's first questions. _But Capel never opened one of his
letters._ The whole pile lay unopened on his dressing-table."

Portal looked crestfallen. "You're sure he didn't open just one of
them? He might have destroyed it after reading it?"

"No, I'm quite positive. Of course, that would have been the natural
solution. No, every one of the letters was unopened. Nothing
burned--nothing torn up. There was no fire in the room."

Portal shook his head. "Extraordinary."

"It was a ghastly business altogether," said Evesham in a low voice.
"Conway and I went up when we heard the shot, and found him. It gave me
a shock, I can tell you."

"Nothing to be done but telephone for the police, I suppose?" said Mr.
Quin.

"No, luckily enough, the local constable happened to be in the kitchen
at the time. One of the dogs--you remember poor old Rover, Conway?--had
strayed the day before. A passing carter had found it half-buried in a
snowdrift and had taken it to the police station. They recognized it as
Capel's, and a dog he was particularly fond of, and the constable came
up with it. He'd just arrived a minute before the shot was fired. It
saved us some trouble."

"Gad, that was a snowstorm," said Conway reminiscently. "About this
time of year, wasn't it? Early January."

"February, I think. Let me see, we went abroad soon afterward."

"I'm pretty sure it was January. My hunter Ned--you remember
Ned?--lamed himself the end of January. That was just after this
business."

"It must have been quite the end of January then. Funny how difficult
it is to recall dates after a lapse of years."

"One of the most difficult things in the world," said Mr. Quin,
conversationally. "Unless you can find a landmark in some big public
event--an assassination of a crowned head, or a big murder trial."

"Why, of course," cried Conway, "it was just before the Appleton case."

"Just after, wasn't it?"

"No, no, don't you remember? Capel knew the Appletons--he'd stayed with
the old man the previous spring--just a week before he died. He was
talking of him one night--what an old curmudgeon he was, and how awful
it must have been for a young and beautiful woman like Mrs. Appleton to
be tied to him. There was no suspicion then that she had done away with
him."

"By Jove, you're right. I remember reading the paragraph in the paper
saying an exhumation order had been granted. It would have been that
same day--I remember only seeing it with half my mind, you know, the
other half wondering about poor old Derek lying dead upstairs."

"A common, but very curious phenomenon, that," observed Mr. Quin. "In
moments of great stress, the mind focuses itself upon some quite
unimportant matter which is remembered long afterward with the utmost
fidelity, driven in, as it were, by the mental stress of the moment. It
may be some quite irrelevant detail, like the pattern of a wallpaper,
but it will never be forgotten."

"Rather extraordinary, your saying that, Mr. Quin," said Conway. "Just
as you were speaking, I suddenly felt myself back in Derek Capel's
room--with Derek lying dead on the floor. I saw as plainly as possible
the big tree outside the window, and the shadow it threw upon the snow
outside. Yes, the moonlight, the snow, and the shadow of the tree--I
can see them again this minute. By Gad, I believe I could draw them,
and yet I never realized I was looking at them at the time."

"His room was the big one over the porch, was it not?" asked Mr. Quin.

"Yes, and the tree was the big beech, just at the angle of the drive."

Mr. Quin nodded, as though satisfied. Mr. Satterthwaite was curiously
thrilled. He was convinced that every word, every reflection of
Mr. Quin's voice was pregnant with purpose. He was driving at
something--exactly what Mr. Satterthwaite did not know, but he was
quite convinced as to whose was the master hand.

There was a momentary pause, and then Evesham reverted to the
preceding topic. "That Appleton case, I remember it very well now.
What a sensation it made. She got off, didn't she? Pretty woman, very
fair--remarkably fair."

Almost against his will, Mr. Satterthwaite's eyes sought the kneeling
figure up above. Was it his fancy, or did he see it shrink a little, as
though at a blow? Did he see a hand slide upward to the tablecloth--and
then pause?

There was a crash of falling glass. Alec Portal, helping himself to
whisky, had let the decanter slip. "I say--damn' sorry. Can't think
what came over me."

Evesham cut short his apologies. "Quite all right. Quite all right,
my dear fellow. Curious--that smash reminded me. That's what she did,
didn't she? Mrs. Appleton? Smashed the port decanter?"

"Yes. Old Appleton had his glass of port--only one--each night. The
day after his death, one of the servants saw her take the decanter out
and smash it deliberately. That set them talking, of course. They all
knew she had been perfectly wretched with him. Rumor grew and grew,
and in the end, months later, some of his relatives applied for an
exhumation order. And sure enough, the old fellow had been poisoned.
Arsenic, wasn't it?"

"No--strychnine, I think. It doesn't much matter. Well, of course,
there it was. Only one person was likely to have done it. Mrs. Appleton
stood her trial. She was acquitted more through the lack of evidence
against her than from any overwhelming proof of innocence. In other
words, she was lucky. Yes, I don't suppose there's much doubt she did
it right enough. What happened to her afterward?"

"Went out to Canada, I believe. Or was it Australia? She had an uncle
or something of the sort out there who offered her a home. Best thing
she could do under the circumstances."

Mr. Satterthwaite was fascinated by Alec Portal's right hand as it
clasped his glass. How tightly he was gripping it.

_You'll smash that in a minute or two, if you're not careful_, thought
Mr. Satterthwaite. _Dear me, how interesting all this is._

Evesham rose and helped himself to a drink. "Well, we're not much
nearer to knowing why poor Derek Capel shot himself," he remarked. "The
court of inquiry hasn't been a great success, has it, Mr. Quin?"

Mr. Quin laughed. It was a strange laugh, mocking--yet sad. It made
everyone jump.

"I beg your pardon," he said. "You are still living in the past, Mr.
Evesham. You are still hampered by your preconceived notion. But I, the
man from outside, the stranger passing by, see only--facts!"

"Facts?"

"Yes--facts."

"What do you mean?" said Evesham.

"I see a clear sequence of facts, outlined by yourselves, but of which
you have not seen the significance. Let us go back ten years and look
at what we see--untrammeled by ideas or sentiment."

Mr. Quin had risen. He looked very tall. The fire leaped fitfully
behind him. He spoke in a low compelling voice. "You are at dinner.
Derek Capel announces his engagement. You think then it was to Marjorie
Dilke. You are not so sure now. He has the restlessly excited manner
of a man who has successfully defied Fate--who, in your own words,
has pulled off a big coup against overwhelming odds. Then comes the
clanging of the bell. He goes out to get the long overdue mail. He
doesn't open his letters, but you mention yourselves that _he opened
the paper to glance at the news_. It is ten years ago--so we cannot
know what the news was that day--a far-off earthquake, a near-at-hand
political crisis? The only thing we do know about the contents of that
paper is that it contained one small paragraph--_a paragraph stating
that the Home Office had given permission to exhume the body of Mr.
Appleton three days ago_."

"What?"

Mr. Quin went on: "Derek Capel goes up to his room, and there he sees
something out of the window. Sir Richard Conway has told us that the
curtain was not drawn across it and further that it gave on the drive.
What did he see? What could he have seen that forced him to take his
life?"

"What do you mean? What did he see?"

"I think," said Mr. Quin, "that he saw a policeman. A policeman who
had come about a dog. But Derek Capel didn't know that--he just saw--a
policeman."

There was a long silence--as though it took some time to drive the
inference home.

"My God!" whispered Evesham at last. "You can't mean that? Appleton?
But he wasn't there at the time Appleton died. The old man was alone
with his wife--"

"But he may have been there a week earlier. Strychnine is not very
soluble unless it is in the form of the hydrochloride. The greater part
of it, put into the port, would be taken in the last glass, perhaps a
week after he left."

Portal sprang forward. His voice was hoarse and his eyes bloodshot.
"Why did she break the decanter?" he cried. "Why did she break the
decanter? Tell me that."

For the first time that evening, Mr. Quin addressed himself to Mr.
Satterthwaite. "You have a wide experience of life, Mr. Satterthwaite.
Perhaps you can tell us that."

Mr. Satterthwaite's voice trembled a little. His cue had come at last.
He was to speak some of the most important lines in the play. He was an
actor now--not a looker-on.

"As I see it," he murmured modestly, "she--cared for Derek Capel.
She was, I think, a good woman--and she had sent him away. When her
husband--died, she suspected the truth. And so, to save the man she
loved, she tried to destroy the evidence against him. Later, I think,
he persuaded her that her suspicions were unfounded, and she consented
to marry him. But even then, she hung back--women, I fancy, have a lot
of instinct."

Mr. Satterthwaite had spoken his part.

Suddenly a long trembling sigh filled the air.

"My God!" cried Evesham, starting, "what was that?"

Mr. Satterthwaite could have told him that it was Eleanor Portal in the
gallery above, but he was too artistic to spoil a good effect.

Mr. Quin was smiling. "My car will be ready by now. Thank you for your
hospitality, Mr. Evesham. I have, I hope, done something for my friend."

They stared at him in blank amazement.

"That aspect of the matter has not struck you? He loved this woman, you
know. Loved her enough to commit murder for her sake. When retribution
overtook him, as he mistakenly thought, he took his own life. But,
unwittingly, he left her to face the music."

"She was acquitted," muttered Evesham.

"Because the case against her could not be proved. I fancy--it may be
only a fancy--that she is still--facing the music."

Portal had sunk into a chair, his face buried in his hands.

Quin turned to Satterthwaite. "Good-by, Mr. Satterthwaite. You are
interested in the drama, are you not?"

Mr. Satterthwaite nodded--surprised.

"I must recommend the harlequinade to your attention. It is dying out
nowadays--but it repays attention, I assure you. Its symbolism is a
little difficult to follow--but the immortals are always immortal, you
know. I wish you all good night."

They saw him stride out into the dark. As before, the colored glass
gave the effect of motley.

Mr. Satterthwaite went upstairs. He went to draw down his window, for
the air was cold. The figure of Mr. Quin moved down the drive, and from
a side door came a woman's figure, running. For a moment they spoke
together, then she retraced her steps to the house. She passed just
below the window, and Mr. Satterthwaite was struck anew by the vitality
of her face. She moved now like a woman in a happy dream.

"Eleanor!"

Alec Portal had joined her.

"Eleanor, forgive me--forgive me. You told me the truth, but God
forgive me--I did not quite believe--"

Mr. Satterthwaite was intensely interested in other people's affairs,
but he was also a gentleman. It was borne in upon him that he must shut
the window. He did so.

But he shut it very slowly.

He heard her voice, exquisite and indescribable. "I know--I know. You
have been in hell. So was I once. Loving--yet alternately believing
and suspecting--thrusting aside one's doubts and having them spring
up again with leering faces. I know, Alec, I know. But there is a
worse hell than that, the hell I have lived in with you. I have seen
your doubt--your fear of me--poisoning all our love. That man, that
chance passer-by, saved me. I could bear it no longer, you understand.
Tonight--tonight I was going to kill myself--Alec--Alec!"




                        THE SHADOW ON THE GLASS


"Listen to this," said Lady Cynthia Drage.

She read aloud from the journal she held in her hand. "'Mr. and Mrs.
Unkerton are entertaining a party at Greenways House this week.
Among the guests are Lady Cynthia Drage, Mr. and Mrs. Richard Scott,
Major Porter, D.S.O., Mrs. Staverton, Captain Allenson, and Mr.
Satterthwaite.'"

"It's as well," remarked Lady Cynthia, casting away the paper, "to know
what we're in for. But they _have_ made a mess of things!"

Her companion, that same Mr. Satterthwaite whose name figured at the
end of the list of guests, looked at her interrogatively. It had
been said that if Mr. Satterthwaite was found at the houses of those
rich who had newly arrived, it was a sign either that the cooking
was unusually good, or that a drama of human life was to be enacted
there. Mr. Satterthwaite was abnormally interested in the comedies and
tragedies of his fellow men.

Lady Cynthia, who was a middle-aged woman, with a hard face and a
liberal allowance of makeup, tapped him smartly with the newest thing
in parasols which lay rakishly across her knee.

"Don't pretend you don't understand me. You do perfectly. What's more,
I believe you're here on purpose to see the fur fly!"

Mr. Satterthwaite protested vigorously. He didn't know what she was
talking about.

"I'm talking about Richard Scott. Do you pretend you've never heard of
him?"

"No, of course not. He's the big-game man, isn't he?"

"That's it--'Great big bears and tigers, etc.,' as the song says.
Of course, he's a great lion himself just now--the Unkertons would
naturally be mad to get hold of him--_and_ the bride! A charming
child--oh! quite a charming child--but so naïve, only twenty, you know,
and he must be at least forty-five."

"Mrs. Scott seems to me very charming," said Mr. Satterthwaite sedately.

"Yes, poor child."

"Why poor child?"

Lady Cynthia cast him a look of reproach, and went on, approaching the
point at issue in her own manner. "Porter's all right--a dull dog,
though--another of these African hunters, all sunburn and silence.
Second fiddle to Richard Scott and always has been--lifelong friends
and all that sort of thing. When I come to think of it, I believe they
were together on that trip--"

"Which trip?"

"_The_ trip. The Mrs. Staverton trip. You'll be saying next you've
never heard of Mrs. Staverton."

"I _have_ heard of Mrs. Staverton," said Mr. Satterthwaite, almost with
unwillingness.

And he and Lady Cynthia exchanged glances.

"It's so exactly like the Unkertons," wailed the latter; "they are
absolutely hopeless--socially, I mean. The idea of asking those two
together! Of course they'd heard that Mrs. Staverton was a sportswoman
and a traveler and all that, and about her book. People like the
Unkertons don't even begin to realize what pitfalls there are! I've
been running them, myself, for the last year, and what I've gone
through nobody knows. One has to be constantly at their elbow. 'Don't
do that! You can't do this!' Thank goodness, I'm through with it now.
Not that we've quarreled--oh! no, I never quarrel--but somebody else
can take on the job. As I've always said, I can put up with vulgarity,
but I can't stand meanness!"

After this somewhat cryptic utterance, Lady Cynthia was silent for a
moment, ruminating on the Unkertons' meanness as displayed to herself.

"If I'd still been running the show for them," she went on presently,
"I should have said quite firmly and plainly, 'You can't ask Mrs.
Staverton with the Richard Scotts. She and he were once--'"

She stopped eloquently.

"But were they once?" asked Mr. Satterthwaite.

"My dear man! It's well known. That trip into the interior! I'm
surprised the woman had the face to accept the invitation."

"Perhaps she didn't know the others were coming," suggested Mr.
Satterthwaite.

"Perhaps she did. That's far more likely."

"You think--"

"She's what I call a dangerous woman--the sort of woman who'd stick at
nothing. I wouldn't be in Richard Scott's shoes this week-end."

"And his wife knows nothing, you think?"

"I'm certain of it. But I suppose some kind friend will enlighten her
sooner or later. Here's Jimmy Allenson. Such a nice boy. He saved my
life in Egypt last winter--I was so bored, you know. Hullo, Jimmy, come
here at once."

Captain Allenson obeyed, dropping down on the turf beside her. He was
a handsome young fellow of thirty, with white teeth and an infectious
smile.

"I'm glad somebody wants me," he observed. "The Scotts are doing the
turtledove stunt, two required, not three, Porter's devouring the
Field, and I've been in mortal danger of being entertained by my
hostess."

He laughed. Lady Cynthia laughed with him. Mr. Satterthwaite, who was
in some ways a little old-fashioned, so much so that he seldom made fun
of his host and hostess until after he had left their house, remained
grave.

"Poor Jimmy," said Lady Cynthia.

"Mine not to reason why, mine but to swiftly fly. I had a narrow escape
of being told the family ghost story."

"An Unkerton ghost," cried Lady Cynthia. "How screaming."

"Not an Unkerton ghost," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "A Greenways ghost.
They bought it with the house."

"Of course," said Lady Cynthia. "I remember now. But it doesn't clank
chains, does it? It's only something to do with a window."

Jimmy Allenson looked up quickly. "A window?"

But for the moment Mr. Satterthwaite did not answer. He was looking
over Jimmy's head at three figures approaching from the direction
of the house--a slim girl between two men. There was a superficial
resemblance between the men, both were tall and dark with bronzed faces
and quick eyes, but looked at more closely the resemblance vanished.

Richard Scott, hunter and explorer, was a man of extraordinarily vivid
personality. He had a manner that radiated magnetism. John Porter, his
friend and fellow hunter, was a man of squarer build with an impassive,
rather wooden face, and very thoughtful gray eyes. He was a quiet man,
content always to play second fiddle to his friend.

And between these two walked Moira Scott who, until three months ago,
had been Moira O'Connell, a slender figure, big wistful brown eyes, and
golden-red hair that stood out round her small face like a saint's halo.

_That child mustn't be hurt_, said Mr. Satterthwaite to himself. _It
would be abominable that a child like that should be hurt._

Lady Cynthia greeted the newcomers with a wave of the latest thing in
parasols. "Sit down, and don't interrupt," she said. "Mr. Satterthwaite
is telling us a ghost story."

"I love ghost stories," said Moira Scott. She dropped down on the grass.

"The ghost of Greenways House?" asked Richard Scott.

"Yes, you know about it?"

Scott nodded. "I used to stay here in the old days," he explained.
"Before the Elliots had to sell up. The Watching Cavalier, that's it,
isn't it?"

"The Watching Cavalier," said his wife softly. "I like that. It sounds
interesting. Please go on."

But Mr. Satterthwaite seemed somewhat loath to do so. He assured her
that it was not really interesting at all.

"Now you've done it, Satterthwaite," said Richard Scott sardonically.
"That hint of reluctance clinches it."

In response to popular clamor, Mr. Satterthwaite was forced to speak.

"It's really very uninteresting," he said apologetically. "I believe
the original story centers round a Cavalier ancestor of the Elliot
family. His wife had a Roundhead lover. The husband was killed by the
lover in an upstairs room, and the guilty pair fled; but, as they fled,
they looked back at the house and saw the face of the dead husband at
the window, watching them. That is the legend, but the ghost story is
only concerned with a pane of glass in the window of that particular
room, on which is an irregular stain, almost imperceptible from near
at hand, but which from far away certainly gives the effect of a man's
face looking out."

"Which window is it?" asked Mrs. Scott, looking up at the house.

"You can't see it from here," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "It is round the
other side, but was boarded up from the inside some years ago--forty
years ago, I think, to be accurate."

"What did they do that for? I thought you said the ghost didn't walk."

"It doesn't," Mr. Satterthwaite assured her. "I suppose--well, I
suppose there grew to be a superstitious feeling about it, that's all."

Then, deftly enough, he succeeded in turning the conversation. Jimmy
Allenson was perfectly ready to hold forth upon Egyptian sand diviners.

"Frauds, most of them. Ready enough to tell you vague things about the
past, but won't commit themselves as to the future."

"I should have thought it was usually the other way about," remarked
John Porter.

"It's illegal to tell the future in this country, isn't it?" said
Richard Scott. "Moira persuaded a gypsy into telling her fortune, but
the woman gave her her shilling back, and said there was nothing doing,
or words to that effect."

"Perhaps she saw something so frightful that she didn't like to tell it
me," said Moira.

"Don't pile on the agony, Mrs. Scott," said Allenson lightly. "I, for
one, refuse to believe that an unlucky fate is hanging over you."

_I wonder_, thought Mr. Satterthwaite. _I wonder._

Then he looked up sharply. Two women were coming from the house, a
short stout woman with black hair, inappropriately dressed in jade
green, and a tall slim figure in creamy white. The first woman was his
hostess, Mrs. Unkerton; the second was a woman he had often heard of,
but never met.

"Here's Mrs. Staverton," announced Mrs. Unkerton, in a tone of great
satisfaction. "All friends here, I think."

"These people have an uncanny gift for saying just the most awful
things they can," murmured Lady Cynthia, but Mr. Satterthwaite was not
listening. He was watching Mrs. Staverton.

Very easy--very natural. Her careless "Hullo! Richard, ages since we
met. Sorry I couldn't come to the wedding. Is this your wife? You must
be tired of meeting all your husband's weather-beaten old friends."
Moira's response--suitable, rather shy. The elder woman's swift
appraising glance that went on lightly to another old friend.

"Hullo, John!" The same easy tone, but with a subtle difference in
it--a warming quality that had been absent before.

And then that sudden smile. It transformed her. Lady Cynthia had been
quite right. A dangerous woman! Very fair--deep blue eyes--not the
traditional coloring of the siren--a face almost haggard in repose. A
woman with a slow dragging voice and a sudden dazzling smile.

Iris Staverton sat down. She became naturally and inevitably the center
of the group. So, you felt, it would always be.

Mr. Satterthwaite was recalled from his thoughts by Major Porter's
suggesting a stroll. Mr. Satterthwaite, who was not, as a general rule,
much given to strolling, acquiesced. The two men sauntered off together
across the lawn.

"Very interesting story of yours just now," said the Major.

"I will show you the window," said Mr. Satterthwaite.

He led the way round to the west side of the house. Here there was
a small formal garden--the Privy Garden, it was always called, and
there was some point in the name, for it was surrounded by high holly
hedges, and even the entrance to it ran zigzag between the same high
prickly hedges.

Once inside, it was very charming with an old-world charm of formal
flower beds, flagged paths, and a low stone seat, exquisitely carved.
When they had reached the center of the garden, Mr. Satterthwaite
turned and pointed up at the house. The length of Greenways House ran
north and south. In this narrow west wall there was only one window, a
window on the first floor, almost overgrown by ivy, with grimy panes,
and which you could just see was boarded up on the inside.

"There you are," said Mr. Satterthwaite.

Craning his neck a little, Porter looked up. "H'm, I can see a kind of
discoloration on one of the panes, nothing more."

"We're too near," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "There's a clearing higher up
in the woods where you get a really good view."

He led the way out of the Privy Garden and, turning sharply to the
left, struck into the woods. A certain enthusiasm of showmanship
possessed him, and he hardly noticed that the man at his side was
absent and inattentive.

"They had, of course, to make another window, when they boarded up this
one," he explained. "The new one faces south, overlooking the lawn
where we were sitting just now. I rather fancy the Scotts have the room
in question. That is why I didn't want to pursue the subject. Mrs.
Scott might have felt nervous if she had realized that she was sleeping
in what might be called the haunted room."

"Yes. I see," said Porter.

Mr. Satterthwaite looked at him sharply, and realized that the other
had not heard a word of what he was saying.

"Very interesting," said Porter. He slashed with his stick at some tall
foxgloves, and, frowning, he said, "She ought not to have come. She
ought never to have come."

People often spoke after this fashion to Mr. Satterthwaite. He seemed
to matter so little, to have so negative a personality. He was merely a
glorified listener.

"No," said Porter, "she ought never to have come."

Mr. Satterthwaite knew instinctively that it was not of Mrs. Scott he
spoke. "You think not?" he asked.

Porter shook his head as though in foreboding. "I was on that trip,"
he said abruptly. "The three of us went. Scott and I and Iris. She's a
wonderful woman--and a damned fine shot." He paused. "What made them
ask her?" he finished abruptly.

Mr. Satterthwaite shrugged his shoulders. "Ignorance," he said.

"There's going to be trouble," said the other. "We must stand by--and
do what we can."

"But surely Mrs. Staverton--"

"I'm talking of Scott." He paused. "You see--there's Mrs. Scott to
consider."

Mr. Satterthwaite had been considering her all along, but he did not
think it necessary to say so, since the other man had so clearly
forgotten her until this minute.

"How did Scott meet his wife?" he asked.

"Last winter, in Cairo. A quick business. They were engaged in three
weeks, and married in six."

"She seems to me very charming."

"She is; no doubt about it. And he adores her--but that will make no
difference." And again Major Porter repeated, using the pronoun that
meant to him one person only, "Hang it all, she shouldn't have come."

Just then they stepped out upon a high grassy knoll at some little
distance from the house. With again something of the pride of the
showman, Mr. Satterthwaite stretched out his arm. "Look," he said.

It was fast growing dusk. The window could still be plainly descried,
and apparently pressed against one of the panes was a man's face
surmounted by a plumed Cavalier's hat.

"Very curious," said Porter. "Really very curious. What will happen
when that pane of glass gets smashed some day?"

Mr. Satterthwaite smiled. "That is one of the most interesting parts of
the story. That pane of glass has been replaced to my certain knowledge
at least eleven times, perhaps oftener. The last time was twelve years
ago when the then owner of the house determined to destroy the myth.
But it's always the same. _The stain reappears_--not all at once; the
discoloration spreads gradually. It takes a month or two as a rule."

For the first time, Porter showed signs of real interest. He gave a
sudden quick shiver. "Damned odd, these things. No accounting for them.
What's the real reason of having the room boarded up inside?"

"Well, an idea got about that the room was--unlucky. The Eveshams were
in it just before the divorce. Then Stanley and his wife were staying
here, and had that room when he ran off with his chorus girl."

Porter raised his eyebrows. "I see. Danger, not to life, but to morals."

_And now_, thought Mr. Satterthwaite, _the Scotts have it. I wonder_--

They retraced their steps in silence to the house. Walking almost
noiselessly on the soft turf, each absorbed in his own thoughts,
they became unwittingly eavesdroppers. They were rounding the corner
of the holly hedge when they heard Iris Staverton's voice, raised
fierce and clear from the depths of the Privy Garden: "You shall be
sorry--sorry--for this!"

Scott's voice answered, low and uncertain, so that the words could
not be distinguished; and then the woman's voice rose again, speaking
words that they were to remember later. "Jealousy--it drives one to the
devil--it _is_ the devil! It can drive one to black murder. Be careful,
Richard; for God's sake, be careful."

And then, on that, she had come out of the Privy Garden, ahead of them,
and on round the corner of the house without seeing them, walking
swiftly, almost running, like a woman hag-ridden and pursued.

Mr. Satterthwaite thought again of Lady Cynthia's words. A dangerous
woman. For the first time he had a premonition of tragedy, coming swift
and inexorable, not to be gainsaid.

Yet that evening he felt ashamed of his fears. Everything seemed normal
and pleasant. Mrs. Staverton, with her easy insouciance, showed no sign
of strain. Moira Scott was her charming, unaffected self. The two women
appeared to be getting on very well. Richard Scott himself seemed to be
in boisterous spirits.

The most worried-looking person was stout Mrs. Unkerton. She confided
at length in Mr. Satterthwaite.

"Think it silly or not, as you like, there's something giving me the
creeps. And I'll tell you frankly, I've sent for the glazier, unbeknown
to Ned."

"The glazier?"

"To put a new pane of glass in that window. It's all very well. Ned's
proud of it--says it gives the house a tone. I don't like it. I tell
you flat. We'll have a nice, plain, modern pane of glass, with no nasty
stories attached to it."

"You forget," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "Or perhaps you don't know. The
stain comes back."

"That's as it may be," said Mrs. Unkerton. "All I can say is, if it
does, it's against nature!"

Mr. Satterthwaite raised his eyebrows, but did not reply.

"And what if it does?" pursued Mrs. Unkerton defiantly. "We're not so
bankrupt, Ned and I, that we can't afford a new pane of glass every
month--or every week if need be for the matter of that."

Mr. Satterthwaite did not meet the challenge. He had seen too many
things crumple and fall before the power of money to believe that even
a Cavalier ghost could put up a successful fight. Nevertheless, he was
interested by Mrs. Unkerton's manifest uneasiness. Even she was not
exempt from the tension in the atmosphere--only she attributed it to
an attenuated ghost story, not to the clash of personalities among her
guests.

Mr. Satterthwaite was fated to hear yet another scrap of conversation
which threw light upon the situation. He was going up the wide
staircase to bed. John Porter and Mrs. Staverton were sitting together
in an alcove of the big hall. She was speaking with a faint irritation
in her golden voice.

"I hadn't the least idea the Scotts were going to be here. I daresay,
if I had known, I shouldn't have come; but I can assure you, my dear
John, that now I am here, I'm not going to run away."

Mr. Satterthwaite passed on up the staircase out of earshot. He
thought, _I wonder now. How much of that is true? Did she know? I
wonder. What's going to come of it?_

He shook his head.

In the clear light of the morning he felt that he had perhaps been a
little melodramatic in his imaginings of the evening before. A moment
of strain--yes, certainly--inevitable under the circumstances--but
nothing more. People adjusted themselves. His fancy that some great
catastrophe was pending was nerves--pure nerves--or possibly liver.
Yes, that was it, liver. He was due at Carlsbad in another fortnight.

On his own account he proposed a little stroll that evening just as it
was growing dusk. He suggested to Major Porter that they should go up
to the clearing and see if Mrs. Unkerton had been as good as her word,
and had a new pane of glass put in. To himself, he said, _Exercise,
that's what I need. Exercise._

The two men walked slowly through the woods. Porter, as usual, was
taciturn.

"I can't help feeling," said Mr. Satterthwaite, loquaciously,
"that we were a little foolish in our imaginings yesterday.
Expecting--er--trouble, you know. After all, people have to behave
themselves--swallow their feelings and that sort of thing."

"Perhaps," said Porter. After a minute or two he added, "Civilized
people."

"You mean?"

"People who've lived outside civilization a good deal sometimes go
back. Revert. Whatever you call it."

They emerged onto the grassy knoll. Mr. Satterthwaite was breathing
rather fast. He never enjoyed going up hill.

He looked toward the window. The face was still there, more lifelike
than ever.

"Our hostess has repented, I see."

Porter threw it only a cursory glance. "Unkerton cut up rough, I
expect," he said indifferently. "He's the sort of man who is willing to
be proud of another family's ghost, and who isn't going to run the risk
of having it driven away when he's paid spot cash for it."

He was silent a minute or two, staring, not at the house, but at the
thick undergrowth by which they were surrounded. "Has it ever struck
you," he said, "that civilization's damned dangerous?"

"Dangerous?" Such a revolutionary remark shocked Mr. Satterthwaite to
the core.

"Yes. There are no safety valves, you see."

He turned abruptly, and they descended the path by which they had come.

"I really am quite at a loss to understand you," said Mr.
Satterthwaite, pattering along with nimble steps to keep up with the
other's strides. "Reasonable people--"

Porter laughed. A short, disconcerting laugh. Then he looked at the
correct little gentleman by his side.

"You think it's all bunkum on my part, Mr. Satterthwaite? But there are
people, you know, who can tell you when a storm's coming. They feel it
beforehand in the air. And other people can foretell trouble. There's
trouble coming now, Mr. Satterthwaite, big trouble. It may come any
minute. It may--"

He stopped dead, clutching Mr. Satterthwaite's arm. And in that tense
minute of silence it came--the sound of two shots and, following them,
a cry--a cry in a woman's voice.

"My God!" cried Porter, "it's come."

He raced down the path, Mr. Satterthwaite panting behind him. In a
minute they came out onto the lawn, close by the hedge of the Privy
Garden. At the same time, Richard Scott and Mr. Unkerton came round the
opposite corner of the house. They halted, facing each other, to left
and right of the entrance to the Privy Garden.

"It--it came from in there," said Unkerton, pointing with a flabby hand.

"We must see," said Porter. He led the way into the enclosure. As
he rounded the last bend of the holly hedge, he stopped dead. Mr.
Satterthwaite peered over his shoulder. A loud cry burst from Richard
Scott.

There were three people in the Privy Garden. Two of them lay on the
grass near the stone seat, a man and a woman. The third was Mrs.
Staverton. She was standing quite close to them by the holly hedge,
gazing with horror-stricken eyes, and holding something in her right
hand.

"Iris," cried Porter. "Iris. For God's sake! What's that you've got in
your hand?"

She looked down at it then--with a kind of wonder, an unbelievable
indifference.

"It's a pistol," she said wonderingly. And then--after what seemed an
interminable time, but was in reality only a few seconds: "I--picked it
up."

Mr. Satterthwaite had gone forward to where Unkerton and Scott were
kneeling on the turf.

"A doctor," the latter was murmuring. "We must have a doctor."

But it was too late for any doctor. Jimmy Allenson, who had complained
that the sand diviners hedged about the future, and Moira Scott, to
whom a gypsy had returned a shilling, lay there in the last great
stillness.

It was Richard Scott who completed a brief examination. The iron nerve
of the man showed in this crisis. After the first cry of agony, he was
himself again.

He laid his wife gently down again. "Shot from behind," he said
briefly. "The bullet has passed right through her."

Then he handled Jimmy Allenson. The wound here was in the breast and
the bullet was lodged in the body.

John Porter came toward them. "Nothing should be touched," he said
sternly. "The police must see it all exactly as it is now."

"The police," said Richard Scott. His eyes lit up with a sudden flame
as he looked at the woman standing by the holly hedge. He made a step
in that direction, but at the same time John Porter also moved, so as
to bar his way. For a moment it seemed as though there was a duel of
eyes between the two friends.

Porter very quietly shook his head. "No, Richard," he said. "It looks
like it--but you're wrong."

Richard Scott spoke with difficulty, moistening his dry lips. "Then
why--has she got that in her hand?"

And again Iris Staverton said in the same lifeless tone, "I--picked it
up."

"The police," said Unkerton, rising. "We must send for the police--at
once. You will telephone perhaps, Scott? Someone should stay here--yes,
I am sure someone should stay here."

In his quiet, gentlemanly manner, Mr. Satterthwaite offered to do so.
His host accepted the offer with manifest relief. "The ladies," he
explained. "I must break the news to the ladies, Lady Cynthia and my
dear wife."

Mr. Satterthwaite stayed in the Privy Garden looking down on the body
of that which had once been Moira Scott. _Poor child_, he said to
himself. _Poor child._

He quoted to himself the tag about the evil men do living after them.
For was not Richard Scott in a way responsible for his innocent wife's
death? They would hang Iris Staverton, he supposed, not that he liked
to think of it, but was not it at least a part of the blame he laid at
the man's door? The evil that men do--

And the girl, the innocent girl, had paid.

He looked down at her with a very deep pity. Her small face, so white
and wistful, a half smile on the lips still. The ruffled golden hair,
the delicate ear. There was a spot of blood on the lobe of it. With
an inner feeling of being something of a detective, Mr. Satterthwaite
deduced an earring, torn away in her fall. He craned his neck forward.
Yes, he was right, there was a small pearl drop hanging from the other
ear.

_Poor child, poor child._

       *       *       *       *       *

"And now, sir," said Inspector Winkfield.

They were in the library. The Inspector, a shrewd-looking, forceful man
of forty-odd, was concluding his investigations. He had questioned most
of the guests, and had by now pretty well made up his mind on the case.
He was listening to what Major Porter and Mr. Satterthwaite had to say.
Mr. Unkerton sat heavily in a chair, staring with protruding eyes at
the opposite wall.

"As I understand it, gentlemen," said the Inspector, "you'd been for a
walk. You were returning to the house by a path that winds round the
left side of what they call the Privy Garden. Is that correct?"

"Quite correct, Inspector."

"You heard two shots, and a woman's scream?"

"Yes."

"You then ran as fast as you could, emerged from the woods, and made
your way to the entrance of the Privy Garden. If anybody had left that
garden, they could only do so by the one entrance. The holly hedges
are impassable. If anyone had run out of the garden and turned to the
right, he would have been met by Mr. Unkerton and Mr. Scott. If he had
turned to the left, he could not have done so without being seen by
you. Is that right?"

"That is so," said Major Porter. His face was very white.

"That seems to settle it," said the Inspector. "Mr. and Mrs. Unkerton
and Lady Cynthia Drage were sitting on the lawn, Mr. Scott was in the
billiard room, which opens onto that lawn. At ten minutes past six,
Mrs. Staverton came out of the house, spoke a word or two to those
sitting there, and went round the corner of the house toward the Privy
Garden. Two minutes later the shots were heard. Mr. Scott rushed out of
the house and, together with Mr. Unkerton, ran to the Privy Garden. At
the same time, you and Mr.--er Satterthwaite arrived from the opposite
direction. Mrs. Staverton was in the Privy Garden with a pistol in her
hand from which two shots had been fired. As I see it, she shot the
lady first from behind, as she was sitting on the bench. Then Captain
Allenson sprang up and went for her, and she shot him in the chest as
he came toward her. I understand that there had been a--er--previous
attachment between her and Mr. Richard Scott--"

"That's a damned lie," said Porter.

His voice rang out hoarse and defiant. The Inspector said nothing,
merely shook his head.

"What is her own story?" asked Mr. Satterthwaite.

"She says that she went into the Privy Garden to be quiet for a little.
Just before she rounded the last hedge, she heard the shots. She
came round the corner, saw the pistol lying at her feet, and picked
it up. No one passed her, and she saw no one in the garden but the
two victims." The Inspector gave an eloquent pause. "That's what she
says--and although I cautioned her, she insisted on making a statement."

"If she said that," said Major Porter, and his face was still deadly
white, "she was speaking the truth. I know Iris Staverton."

"Well, sir," said the Inspector, "there'll be plenty of time to go into
all that later. In the meantime, I've got my duty to do."

With an abrupt movement, Porter turned to Mr. Satterthwaite. "You!
Can't you help? Can't _you_ do something?"

Mr. Satterthwaite could not help feeling immensely flattered. He had
been appealed to, he, most insignificant of men, and by a man like John
Porter.

He was just about to flutter out a regretful reply when the butler,
Thompson, entered, with a card upon a salver which he took to his
master with an apologetic cough. Mr. Unkerton was still sitting huddled
up in a chair, taking no part in the proceedings.

"I told the gentleman you would probably not be able to see him, sir,"
said Thompson, "but he insisted that he had an appointment and that it
was most urgent."

Unkerton took the card. "Mr. Harley Quin," he read. "I remember, he was
to see me about a picture. I did make an appointment, but as things
are--"

But Mr. Satterthwaite had started forward. "Mr. Harley Quin, did you
say?" he cried. "How extraordinary, how very extraordinary. Major
Porter, you asked me if I could help you. I think I can. This Mr. Quin
is a friend--or I should say, an acquaintance of mine. He is a most
remarkable man."

"One of these amateur solvers of crime, I suppose," remarked the
Inspector disparagingly.

"No," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "He is not that kind of man at all. But
he has a power--an almost uncanny power--of showing you what you have
seen with your own eyes, of making clear to you what you have heard
with your own ears. Let us, at any rate, give him an outline of the
case, and hear what he has to say."

Mr. Unkerton glanced at the Inspector, who merely snorted and looked at
the ceiling. Then the former gave a short nod to Thompson, who left the
room and returned ushering in a tall, slim stranger.

"Mr. Unkerton?" The stranger shook him by the hand. "I am sorry to
intrude upon you at such a time. We must leave our little picture chat
until another time. Ah! my friend, Mr. Satterthwaite. Still as fond of
the drama as ever?"

A faint smile played for a minute round the stranger's lips as he said
these last words.

"Mr. Quin," said Mr. Satterthwaite impressively, "we have a drama here;
we are in the midst of one. I should like, and my friend Major Porter
would like, to have your opinion of it."

Mr. Quin sat down. The red-shaded lamp threw a broad band of colored
light over the checked pattern of his overcoat, and left his face in
shadow almost as though he wore a mask.

Succinctly, Mr. Satterthwaite recited the main points of the tragedy.
Then he paused, breathlessly awaiting the words of the oracle.

But Mr. Quin merely shook his head. "A sad story," he said. "A very sad
and shocking tragedy. The lack of motive makes it very intriguing."

Unkerton stared at him. "You don't understand," he said. "Mrs.
Staverton was heard to threaten Richard Scott. She was bitterly jealous
of his wife. Jealousy--"

"I agree," said Mr. Quin. "Jealousy or demoniac possession. It's all
the same. But you misunderstand me. I was not referring to the murder
of Mrs. Scott, but to that of Captain Allenson."

"You're right," cried Porter, springing forward. "There's a flaw there.
If Iris had ever contemplated shooting Mrs. Scott, she'd have got her
alone somewhere. No, we're on the wrong tack. And I think I see another
solution. Only those three people went into the Privy Garden. That is
indisputable, and I don't intend to dispute it. But I reconstruct the
tragedy differently. Supposing Jimmy Allenson shoots first Mrs. Scott
and then himself. That's possible, isn't it? He flings the pistol from
him as he falls--Mrs. Staverton finds it lying on the ground and picks
it up just as she said. How's that?"

The Inspector shook his head. "Won't wash, Major Porter. If Captain
Allenson had fired that shot close to his body, the cloth would have
been singed."

"He might have held the pistol at arm's length."

"Why should he? No sense in it. Besides, there's no motive."

"Might have gone off his head suddenly," muttered Porter, but without
any great conviction. He fell to silence again, suddenly rousing
himself to say defiantly, "Well, Mr. Quin?"

The latter shook his head. "I'm not a magician. I'm not even a
criminologist. But I will tell you one thing--I believe in the value
of impressions. In any time of crisis there is always one moment that
stands out from all the others, one picture that remains when all else
has faded. Mr. Satterthwaite is, I think, likely to have been the
most unprejudiced observer of those present. Will you cast your mind
back, Mr. Satterthwaite, and tell us the moment that made the strongest
impression on you? Was it when you heard the shots? Was it when you
first saw the dead bodies? Was it when you first observed the pistol in
Mrs. Staverton's hand? Clear your mind of any preconceived standard of
values and tell us."

Mr. Satterthwaite fixed his eyes on Mr. Quin's face, rather as a
schoolboy might repeat a lesson of which he was not sure.

"No," he said, slowly. "It was not any of these. The moment
that I shall always remember was when I stood alone by the
bodies--afterward--looking down on Mrs. Scott. She was lying on her
side. Her hair was ruffled. There was a spot of blood on her little
ear."

And instantly, as he said it, he felt that he had said a terrific, a
significant thing.

"Blood on her ear? Yes, I remember," said Unkerton slowly.

"Her earring must have been torn out when she fell," explained Mr.
Satterthwaite.

But it sounded a little improbable as he said it.

"She was lying on her left side," said Porter. "I suppose it was that
ear?"

"No," said Mr. Satterthwaite quickly. "It was her right ear."

The Inspector coughed. "I found this in the grass," he vouchsafed. He
held up a loop of gold wire.

"But, my God, man," cried Porter. "The thing can't have been wrenched
to pieces by a mere fall. It's more as though it had been shot away by
a bullet."

"So it was," cried Mr. Satterthwaite. "It was a bullet. It must have
been."

"There were only two shots," said the Inspector. "A shot can't have
grazed her ear and shot her in the back as well. And if one shot
carried away the earring, and the second shot killed her, it can't have
killed Captain Allenson as well--not unless he was standing close in
front of her--very close--facing her as it might be. Oh! no, not even
then, unless, that is--"

"Unless she was in his arms, you were going to say," said Mr. Quin,
with a queer little smile. "Well, why not?"

Everyone stared at each other. The idea was so vitally strange to
them--Allenson and Mrs. Scott. Mr. Unkerton voiced the same feeling.

"But they hardly knew each other," he said.

"I don't know," said Mr. Satterthwaite thoughtfully. "They might have
known each other better than we thought. Lady Cynthia said he saved
her from being bored in Egypt last winter, and you"--he turned to
Porter--"you told me that Richard Scott met his wife in Cairo last
winter. They might have known each other very well indeed out there."

"They didn't seem to be together much," said Unkerton.

"No--they rather avoided each other. It was almost unnatural, now I
come to think of it--"

They all looked at Mr. Quin, as if a little startled at the conclusions
at which they had arrived so unexpectedly.

Mr. Quin rose to his feet. "You see," he said, "what Mr.
Satterthwaite's impression has done for us." He turned to Unkerton. "It
is your turn now."

"Eh? I don't understand you."

"You were very thoughtful when I came into this room. I should like
to know exactly what thought it was that obsessed you. Never mind
if it has nothing to do with the tragedy. Never mind if it seems to
you--superstitious--" Mr. Unkerton started, ever so slightly. "Tell us."

"I don't mind telling you," said Unkerton. "Though it's nothing to do
with the business, and you'll probably laugh at me into the bargain. I
was wishing that my Missis had left well alone and not replaced that
pane of glass in the haunted window. I feel as though doing that has
maybe brought a curse upon us."

He was unable to understand why the two men opposite him stared so.

"But she hasn't replaced it yet," said Mr. Satterthwaite at last.

"Yes, she has. Man came first thing this morning."

"My God!" said Porter, "I begin to understand. That room, it's paneled,
I suppose, not papered?"

"Yes, but what does that--"

But Porter had swung out of the room. The others followed him. He went
straight upstairs to the Scotts' bedroom. It was a charming room,
paneled in cream, with two windows facing south. Porter felt with his
hands along the panels on the western wall.

"There's a spring somewhere--must be. Ah!" There was a click, and a
section of the paneling rolled back. It disclosed the grimy panes of
the haunted window. One pane of glass was clean and new. Porter stooped
quickly and picked up something. He held it out on the palm of his
hand. It was a fragment of ostrich feather. Then he looked at Mr. Quin.
Mr. Quin nodded.

He went across to the hat cupboard in the bedroom. There were several
hats in it--the dead woman's hats. He took out one with a large brim
and curling feathers--an elaborate Ascot hat.

Mr. Quin began speaking in a gentle, reflective voice.

"Let us suppose," said Mr. Quin, "a man who is by nature intensely
jealous, a man who has stayed here in bygone years and knows the secret
of the spring in the paneling. To amuse himself he opens it one day,
and looks out over the Privy Garden. There, secure as they think from
being over-looked, he sees his wife and another man. There can be no
possible doubt in his mind as to the relations between them. He is
mad with rage. What shall he do? An idea comes to him. He goes to the
cupboard and puts on the hat with the brim and feathers. It is growing
dusk, and he remembers the story of the stain on the glass. Anyone
looking up at the window will see as they think the Watching Cavalier.
Thus secured, he watches them, and at the moment they are clasped in
each other's arms, he shoots. He is a good shot--a wonderful shot. As
they fall, he fires once more--that shot carries away the earring.
He flings the pistol out of the window into the Privy Garden, rushes
downstairs and out through the billiard room."

Porter took a step toward him.

"But he let her be accused?" he cried. "He stood by and let her be
accused? Why? Why?"

"I think you know why," said Mr. Quin. "I should guess--it's only
guesswork on my part, mind--that Richard Scott was once madly in love
with Iris Staverton--so madly that even meeting her years afterward
stirred up the embers of jealousy again. I should say that Iris
Staverton once fancied that she might love him, that she went on a
hunting trip with him and another--and that she came back in love with
the better man."

"The better man," muttered Porter, dazed. "You mean--"

"Yes," said Mr. Quin, with a faint smile. "I mean you." He paused a
minute, and then said, "If I were you--I should go to her now."

"I will," said Porter.

He turned and left the room.




                        AT THE BELLS AND MOTLEY


Mr. Satterthwaite was annoyed. Altogether it had been an unfortunate
day. They had started late; they had taken the wrong turning and lost
themselves amid the wilds of Salisbury Plain. Now it was close on
eight o'clock; they were still a matter of forty miles from Marswick
Manor, whither they were bound, and a puncture had supervened to render
matters still more trying.

Mr. Satterthwaite, looking like some small bird whose plumage had been
ruffled, walked up and down in front of the village garage while his
chauffeur conversed in hoarse undertones with the local expert.

"Half an hour _at_ least," said that worthy, pronouncing judgment.

"And lucky at that," supplemented Masters, the chauffeur. "More like
three quarters if you ask me."

"What is this--place, anyway?" demanded Mr. Satterthwaite fretfully.
Being a little gentleman considerate of the feelings of others, he
substituted the word "place" for "Godforsaken hole" which had first
risen to his lips.

"Kirtlington Mallet."

Mr. Satterthwaite was not much wiser, and yet a faint familiarity
seemed to linger round the name. He looked round him disparagingly.
Kirtlington Mallet seemed to consist of one straggling street, the
garage and the post office on one side of it balanced by three
indeterminate shops on the other side. Farther down the road, however,
Mr. Satterthwaite perceived something that creaked and swung in the
wind, and his spirits rose ever so slightly.

"There's an inn here, I see," he remarked.

"Bells and Motley," said the garageman. "That's it--yonder."

"If I might make a suggestion, sir," said Masters. "Why not try it?
They would be able to give you some sort of a meal, no doubt--not of
course, what you are accustomed to--" He paused apologetically, for Mr.
Satterthwaite was accustomed to the best cooking of continental chefs,
and had in his own service a _cordon bleu_ to whom he paid a fabulous
salary.

"We shan't be able to take the road again for another three quarters of
an hour, sir. I'm sure of that. And it's already past eight o'clock.
You could ring up Sir George Foster, sir, from the inn, and acquaint
him with the cause of our delay."

"You seem to think you can arrange everything, Masters," said Mr.
Satterthwaite snappily.

Masters, who did think so, maintained a respectful silence.

Mr. Satterthwaite, in spite of his earnest wish to discountenance
any suggestion that might possibly be made to him--he was in that
mood--nevertheless looked down the road toward the creaking inn sign
with faint inward approval. He was a man of birdlike appetite, an
epicure; but even such men can be hungry.

"The Bells and Motley," he said thoughtfully. "That's an odd name for
an inn. I don't know that I ever heard it before."

"There's odd folks come to it by all account," said the local man.

He was bending over the wheel, and his voice came muffled and
indistinct.

"Odd folks?" queried Mr. Satterthwaite. "Now what do you mean by that?"

The other hardly seemed to know what he meant.

"Folks that come and go. That kind," he said vaguely.

Mr. Satterthwaite reflected that people who come to an inn are almost
of necessity those who "come and go." The definition seemed to him to
lack precision. But nevertheless his curiosity was stimulated. Somehow
or other he had got to put in three quarters of an hour. The Bells and
Motley would be as good as anywhere else.

With his usual small, mincing steps he walked away down the road. From
afar there came a rumble of thunder. The mechanic looked up and spoke
to Masters: "There's a storm coming over. Thought I could feel it in
the air."

"Crikey," said Masters. "And forty miles to go."

"Ah!" said the other. "There's no need to be hurrying over this job.
You'll not be wanted to take the road till the storm's passed over.
That little boss of yours doesn't look as though he'd relish being out
in thunder and lightning."

"Hope they'll do him well at that place," muttered the chauffeur. "I'll
be pushing along there for a bite myself presently."

"Billy Jones is all right," said the garageman. "Keeps a good table."

Mr. William Jones, a big burly man of fifty, and landlord of the Bells
and Motley, was at this minute beaming ingratiatingly down on little
Mr. Satterthwaite.

"Can do you a nice steak, sir--_and_ fried potatoes, and as good a
cheese as any gentleman could wish for. This way, sir, in the coffee
room. We're not very full at present, the last of the fishing gentlemen
just gone. A little later we'll be full again for the hunting. Only one
gentleman here at present, name of Quin--"

Mr. Satterthwaite stopped dead.

"Quin?" he said excitedly. "Did you say Quin?"

"That's the name, sir. Friend of yours, perhaps?"

"Yes, indeed. Oh! yes, most certainly." Twittering with excitement,
Mr. Satterthwaite hardly realized that the world might contain more
than one man of that name. He had no doubts at all. In an odd way, the
information fitted in with what the man at the garage had said. "Folks
that come and go." A very apt description of Mr. Quin. And the name of
the inn too seemed a peculiarly fitting and appropriate one.

"Dear me, dear me," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "What a _very_ odd thing.
That we should meet like this! Mr. Harley Quin, is it not?"

"That's right, sir. This is the coffee room, sir. Ah! here is the
gentleman."

Tall, dark, smiling, the familiar figure of Mr. Quin rose from the
table at which he was sitting, and the well-remembered voice spoke.

"Ah! Mr. Satterthwaite, we meet again. An unexpected meeting!"

Mr. Satterthwaite was shaking him warmly by the hand.

"Delighted. Delighted, I'm sure. A lucky breakdown for me. My car, you
know. And you are staying here? For long?"

"One night only."

"Then I am indeed fortunate."

Mr. Satterthwaite sat down opposite his friend with a little sigh of
satisfaction, and regarded the dark, smiling face opposite him with a
pleasurable expectancy.

The other man shook his head gently.

"I assure you," he said, "that I have not a bowl of goldfish or a
rabbit to produce from my sleeve."

"Too bad," cried Mr. Satterthwaite, a little taken aback. "Yes, I must
confess--I do rather adopt that attitude toward you. A man of magic.
Ha, ha. That is how I regard you. A man of magic."

"And yet," said Mr. Quin, "it is you who do the conjuring tricks, not
I."

"Ah!" said Mr. Satterthwaite eagerly. "But I cannot do them without
you. I lack--shall we say--inspiration?"

Mr. Quin smilingly shook his head. "That is too big a word. I speak the
cue, that is all."

The landlord came in at that minute with bread and a slab of yellow
butter. As he set the things on the table there was a vivid flash of
lightning, and a clap of thunder almost overhead.

"A wild night, gentlemen."

"On such a night--" began Mr. Satterthwaite, and stopped.

"Funny now," said the landlord, unconscious of the question, "if those
weren't just the words I was going to use myself. It was just such a
night as this when Captain Harwell brought his bride home, the very day
before he disappeared forever."

"Ah!" cried Mr. Satterthwaite, suddenly. "Of course!"

He had got the clue. He knew now why the name Kirtlington Mallet
was familiar. Three months before he had read every detail of the
astonishing disappearance of Captain Richard Harwell. Like other
newspaper readers all over Great Britain, he had puzzled over the
details of the disappearance, and, also like every other Briton, had
evolved his own theories.

"Of course," he repeated. "It was at Kirtlington Mallet it happened."

"It was at this house he stayed for the hunting last winter," said
the landlord. "Oh! I knew him well. A main handsome young gentleman
and not one that you'd think had a care on his mind. He was done away
with--that's my belief. Many's the time I've seen them come riding home
together--he and Miss Le Couteau, and all the village saying there'd be
a match come of it--and sure enough, so it did. A very beautiful young
lady, and well thought of, for all she was a Canadian and a stranger.
Ah! there's some dark mystery there. We'll never know the rights of it.
It broke her heart. It did, sure enough. You've heard as she's sold the
place up and gone abroad; couldn't bear to go on here with everyone
staring and pointing after her--through no fault of her own, poor young
dear? A black mystery, that's what it is."

He shook his head, then, suddenly recollecting his duties, hurried from
the room.

"A black mystery," said Mr. Quin softly.

His voice was provocative in Mr. Satterthwaite's ear.

"Are you pretending that we can solve the mystery where Scotland Yard
failed?" he asked sharply.

The other made a characteristic gesture.

"Why not? Time has passed. Three months. That makes a difference."

"That is a curious idea of yours," said Mr. Satterthwaite slowly. "That
one sees things better afterward than at the time."

"The longer the time that has elapsed, the more things fall into
proportion. One sees them in their true relationship to one another."

There was a silence which lasted for some minutes.

"I am not sure," said Mr. Satterthwaite, in a hesitating voice, "that I
remember the facts clearly by now."

"I think you do," said Mr. Quin quietly.

It was all the encouragement Mr. Satterthwaite needed. His general role
in life was that of listener and looker-on. Only in the company of Mr.
Quin was the position reversed. There Mr. Quin was the appreciative
listener, and Mr. Satterthwaite took the center of the stage.

"It was just over a year ago," he said, "that Ashley Grange passed
into the possession of Miss Eleanor Le Couteau. It is a beautiful old
house, but it had been neglected and allowed to remain empty for many
years. It could not have found a better chatelaine. Miss Le Couteau
was a French Canadian, her forebears were _émigrés_ from the French
Revolution, and had handed down to her a collection of almost priceless
French relics and antiques. She was a buyer and a collector also, with
a very fine and discriminating taste, so much so that, when she decided
to sell Ashley Grange and everything it contained after the tragedy,
Mr. Cyrus G. Bradburn, the American millionaire, made no bones about
paying the fancy price of sixty thousand pounds for the Grange as it
stood."

Mr. Satterthwaite paused.

"I mention these things," he said apologetically, "not because they are
relevant to the story--strictly speaking, they are not--but to convey
an atmosphere, the atmosphere of young Mrs. Harwell."

Mr. Quin nodded. "Atmosphere is always valuable," he said gravely.

"So we get a picture of this girl," continued the other. "Just
twenty-three, dark, beautiful, accomplished, nothing crude and
unfinished about her. And rich--we must not forget that. She was an
orphan. A Mrs. St. Clair, a lady of unimpeachable breeding and social
standing, lived with her as duenna. But Eleanor Le Couteau had complete
control of her own fortune. And fortune hunters are never hard to seek.
At least a dozen impecunious young men were to be found dangling around
her on all occasions, in the hunting-field, in the ballroom, wherever
she went. Young Lord Leccan, the most eligible party in the country, is
reported to have asked her to marry him, but she remained heart-free.
That is, until the coming of Captain Richard Harwell.

"Captain Harwell had put up at the local inn for the hunting. He was a
dashing rider to hounds, a handsome laughing daredevil of a fellow.
You remember the old saying, Mr. Quin? 'Happy the wooing that's not
long doing.' The adage was carried out at least in part. At the end of
two months, Richard Harwell and Eleanor Le Couteau were engaged.

"The marriage followed three months afterward. The happy pair went
abroad for a two weeks' honeymoon, and then returned to take up their
residence at Ashley Grange. The landlord has just told us that it was
on a night of storm such as this that they returned to their home.
An omen, I wonder? Who can tell. Be that as it may, the following
morning very early--about half-past seven--Captain Harwell was seen
walking in the garden by one of the gardeners, John Mathias. He was
bareheaded, and was whistling. We have a picture there, a picture of
lightheartedness, of careless happiness. And yet from that minute, as
far as we know, no one ever set eyes on Captain Richard Harwell again."

Mr. Satterthwaite paused, pleasantly conscious of a dramatic moment.
The admiring glance of Mr. Quin gave him the tribute he needed, and he
went on.

"The disappearance was remarkable--unaccountable. It was not till the
following day that the distracted wife called in the police. As you
know, they have not succeeded in solving the mystery."

"There have, I suppose, been theories?" asked Mr. Quin.

"Oh! theories, I grant you. Theory No. 1, that Captain Harwell had
been murdered, done away with. But if so, where was the body? It could
hardly have been spirited away. And besides, what motive was there? As
far as was known, Captain Harwell had not an enemy in the world."

He paused abruptly, as though uncertain. Mr. Quin leaned forward. "You
are thinking," he said softly, "of young Stephen Grant."

"I am," admitted Mr. Satterthwaite. "Stephen Grant, if I remember
rightly, had been in charge of Captain Harwell's horses, and had been
discharged by his master for some trifling offense. On the morning
after the home-coming, very early, Stephen Grant was seen in the
vicinity of Ashley Grange, and could give no good account of his
presence there. He was detained by the police as being concerned in
the disappearance of Captain Harwell, but nothing could be proved
against him, and he was eventually discharged. It is true that he might
be supposed to bear a grudge against Captain Harwell for his summary
dismissal, but the motive was undeniably of the flimsiest. I suppose
the police felt they must do something. You see, as I said just now,
Captain Harwell had not an enemy in the world."

"As far as was known," said Mr. Quin reflectively.

Mr. Satterthwaite nodded appreciatively.

"We are coming to that. What, after all, _was_ known of Captain
Harwell? When the police came to look into his antecedents they were
confronted with a singular paucity of material. Who was Richard
Harwell? Where did he come from? He had appeared literally out of the
blue, as it seemed. He was a magnificent rider, and apparently well
off. Nobody in Kirtlington Mallet had bothered to inquire further.
Miss Le Couteau had had no parents or guardians to make inquiries into
the prospects and standing of her fiancé. She was her own mistress.
The police theory at this point was clear enough. A rich girl and an
impudent impostor. The old story!

"But it was not quite that. True, Miss Le Couteau had no parents or
guardians, but she had an excellent firm of solicitors in London
who acted for her. Their evidence made the mystery deeper. Eleanor
Le Couteau had wished to settle a sum outright upon her prospective
husband, but he had refused. He himself was well off, he declared. It
was proved conclusively that Harwell never had a penny of his wife's
money. Her fortune was absolutely intact.

"He was, therefore, no common swindler; but was his object a refinement
of the art? Did he propose blackmail at some future date if Eleanor
Harwell should wish to marry some other man? I will admit that
something of that kind seemed to me the most likely solution. It has
always seemed so to me--until tonight."

Mr. Quin leaned forward, prompting him.

"Tonight?"

"Tonight--I am not satisfied with that. How did he manage to disappear
so suddenly and completely--at that hour in the morning, with every
laborer bestirring himself and tramping to work? Bareheaded, too."

"There is no doubt about that latter point--since the gardener saw him?"

"Yes--the gardener--John Mathias. Was there anything there, I wonder?"

"The police would not overlook him," said Mr. Quin.

"They questioned him closely. He never wavered in his statement. His
wife bore him out. He left his cottage at seven to attend to the
greenhouses; he returned at twenty minutes to eight. The servants in
the house heard the front door slam at about a quarter after seven.
That fixes the time when Captain Harwell left the house. Ah! yes, I
know what you are thinking."

"Do you, I wonder?" said Mr. Quin.

"I fancy so. Time enough for Mathias to have made away with his master.
But why, man, why? And if so, where did he hide the body?"

The landlord came in bearing a tray.

"Sorry to have kept you so long, gentlemen."

The odor from the dishes was pleasant to Mr. Satterthwaite's nostrils.
He felt gracious. "This looks excellent," he said. "Most excellent. We
have been discussing the disappearance of Captain Harwell. What became
of the gardener Mathias?"

"Took a place in Essex, I believe. Didn't care to stay hereabouts.
There were some as looked askance at him, you understand. Not that I
ever believed he had anything to do with it."

Mr. Satterthwaite helped himself. Mr. Quin followed suit. The landlord
seemed disposed to linger and chat. Mr. Satterthwaite had no objection;
on the contrary. "This Mathias now," he said. "What kind of a man was
he?"

"Middle-aged chap, must have been a powerful fellow once, but bent and
crippled with rheumatism. He had that mortal bad, was laid up many
a time with it, unable to do any work. For my part, I think it was
sheer kindness on Miss Eleanor's part to keep him on. He'd outgrown
his usefulness as a gardener, though his wife managed to make herself
useful up at the house. Been a cook, she had, and always willing to
lend a hand."

"What sort of a woman was she?" asked Mr. Satterthwaite, quickly.

The landlord's answer disappointed him. "A plain body. Middle-aged,
and dour-like in manner. Deaf, too. Not that I ever knew much of them.
They'd only been here a month, you understand, when the thing happened.
They say he'd been a rare good gardener in his time, though. Wonderful
testimonials Miss Eleanor had with him."

"Was she interested in gardening?" asked Mr. Quin softly.

"No, sir, I couldn't say that she was, not like some of the ladies
round here who pay good money to gardeners and spend the whole of their
time grubbing about on their knees as well. Foolishness I call it. You
see, Miss Le Couteau wasn't here very much except in the winter for the
hunting. The rest of the time she was up in London and away in those
foreign seaside places where they say the French ladies don't so much
as put a toe into the water for fear of spoiling their costumes, or so
I've heard."

Mr. Satterthwaite smiled. "There was no--er--woman of any kind mixed up
with Captain Harwell?" he asked. Though his first theory was disposed
of, he nevertheless clung to his idea.

Mr. William Jones shook his head. "Nothing of that sort. Never a
whisper of it. No, it's a dark mystery, that's what it is."

"And your theory? What do you yourself think?" persisted Mr.
Satterthwaite.

"What do I think?"

"Yes."

"Don't know what to think. It's my belief as how he was done in, but
who by I can't say. I'll fetch you gentlemen the cheese."

He stumped from the room bearing empty dishes. The storm, which had
been quieting down, suddenly broke out with redoubled vigor. A flash
of forked lightning and a great clap of thunder close upon each other
made little Mr. Satterthwaite jump, and before the last echoes of
the thunder had died away, a girl came into the room carrying the
advertised cheese.

She was tall and dark, and handsome in a sullen fashion of her own.
Her likeness to the landlord of the Bells and Motley was apparent
enough to proclaim her his daughter.

"Good evening, Mary," said Mr. Quin. "A stormy night."

She nodded. "I hate these stormy nights," she muttered.

"You are afraid of thunder, perhaps?" said Mr. Satterthwaite kindly.

"Afraid of thunder? Not me! There's little that I'm afraid of. No, but
the storm sets them off. Talking, talking, the same thing over and over
again, like a lot of parrots. Father begins it: 'It reminds me, this
does, of the night poor Captain Harwell--' And so on, and so on." She
turned on Mr. Quin. "You've heard how he goes on. What's the sense of
it? Can't anyone let past things be?"

"A thing is only past when it is done with," said Mr. Quin.

"Isn't this done with? Suppose he wanted to disappear? These fine
gentlemen do sometimes."

"You think he disappeared of his own free will?"

"Why not? It would make better sense than to suppose a kindhearted
creature like Stephen Grant murdered him. What should he murder him
for, I should like to know? Stephen had had a drop too much one day
and spoke to him saucy like, and got the sack for it. But what of it?
He got another place just as good. Is that a reason to murder a man in
cold blood?"

"But surely," said Mr. Satterthwaite, "the police were quite satisfied
of his innocence."

"The police! What do the police matter? When Stephen comes into the bar
of an evening, every man looks at him queer like. They don't really
believe he murdered Harwell, but they're not sure, and so they look at
him sideways and edge away. Nice life for a man, to see people shrink
away from you, as though you were something different from the rest of
the folks. Why won't Father hear of our getting married, Stephen and
I? 'You can take your pigs to a better market, my girl. I've nothing
against Stephen, but--well, we don't know, do we?'"

She stopped, her breast heaving with the violence of her resentment.

"It's cruel, cruel, that's what it is," she burst out. "Stephen, that
wouldn't hurt a fly! And all through life there'll be people who'll
think he did it. It's turning him queer and bitter like. I don't
wonder, I'm sure. And the more he's like that, the more people think
there must have been something in it."

Again she stopped. Her eyes were fixed on Mr. Quin's face, as though
something in it was drawing this outburst from her.

"Can nothing be done?" said Mr. Satterthwaite.

He was genuinely distressed. The thing was, he saw, inevitable. The
very vagueness and unsatisfactoriness of the evidence against Stephen
Grant made it the more difficult for him to disprove the accusation.

The girl whirled round on him. "Nothing but the truth can help him,"
she cried. "If Captain Harwell were to be found, if he was to come
back. If the true rights of it were only known--"

She broke off with something very like a sob, and hurried quickly from
the room.

"A fine-looking girl," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "A sad case altogether.
I wish--I very much wish that something could be done about it."

His kind heart was troubled.

"We are doing what we can," said Mr. Quin. "There is still nearly half
an hour before your car can be ready."

Mr. Satterthwaite stared at him. "You think we can come at the truth
just by--talking it over like this?"

"You have seen much of life," said Mr. Quin gravely. "More than most
people."

"Life has passed me by," said Mr. Satterthwaite bitterly.

"But in so doing has sharpened your vision. Where others are blind you
can see."

"It is true," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "I am a great observer."

He plumed himself complacently. The moment of bitterness was past. "I
look at it like this," he said after a minute or two. "To get at the
cause for a thing, we must study the effect."

"Very good," said Mr. Quin approvingly.

"The effect in this case is that Miss Le Couteau--Mrs. Harwell, I
mean--is a wife and yet not a wife. She is not free--she cannot marry
again. And look at it as we will, we see Richard Harwell as a sinister
figure, a man from nowhere with a mysterious past."

"I agree," said Mr. Quin. "You see what all are bound to see, what
cannot be missed, Captain Harwell in the limelight, a suspicious
figure."

Mr. Satterthwaite looked at him doubtfully. The words seemed somehow to
suggest a faintly different picture to his mind. "We have studied the
effect," he said. "Or call it the _result_. We can now pass--"

Mr. Quin interrupted him. "You have not touched on the result on the
strictly material side."

"You are right," said Mr. Satterthwaite, after a moment or two for
consideration. "One should do the thing thoroughly. Let us say then
that the result of the tragedy is that Mrs. Harwell is a wife and not
a wife, unable to marry again, that Mr. Cyrus Bradburn has been able
to buy Ashley Grange and its contents for--sixty thousand pounds, was
it?--and that somebody in Essex has been able to secure John Mathias
as a gardener! For all that, we do not suspect 'somebody in Essex' or
Mr. Cyrus Bradburn of having engineered the disappearance of Captain
Harwell."

"You are sarcastic," said Mr. Quin.

Mr. Satterthwaite looked sharply at him. "But surely you agree--"

"Oh! I agree," said Mr. Quin. "The idea is absurd. What next?"

"Let us imagine ourselves back on the fatal day. The disappearance has
taken place, let us say, this very morning."

"No, no," said Mr. Quin, smiling. "Since, in our imagination at least,
we have power over time, let us turn it the other way. Let us say the
disappearance of Captain Harwell took place a hundred years ago. That
we, in the twenty-first century, are looking back."

"You are a strange man," said Mr. Satterthwaite slowly. "You believe in
the past, not the present. Why?"

"You used, not long ago, the word atmosphere. There is no atmosphere in
the present."

"That is true, perhaps," said Mr. Satterthwaite thoughtfully. "Yes, it
is true. The present is apt to be--parochial."

"A good word," said Mr. Quin.

Mr. Satterthwaite gave a funny little bow. "You are too kind," he said.

"Let us take--not this present year, that would be too difficult, but
say--last year," continued the other. "Sum it up for me, you, who have
the gift of the neat phrase."

Mr. Satterthwaite thought for a minute. He was jealous of his
reputation.

"A hundred years ago we have the age of powder and patches," he
said. "Shall we say that it was the age of crossword puzzles and cat
burglars?"

"Very good," approved Mr. Quin. "You mean that nationally, not
internationally, I presume?"

"As to crossword puzzles, I must confess that I do not know," said
Mr. Satterthwaite. "But the cat burglar had a great inning on the
Continent. You remember that series of famous thefts from French
châteaux? It is surmised that one man alone could not have done it. The
most miraculous feats were performed to gain admission. There was a
theory that a troupe of acrobats were concerned--the Clondinis. I once
saw their performance--truly masterly. A mother, son, and daughter.
They vanished from the stage in a rather mysterious fashion. But we are
wandering from our subject."

"Not very far," said Mr. Quin. "Only across the Channel."

"Where the French ladies will not wet their toes, according to our
worthy host," said Mr. Satterthwaite, laughing.

There was a pause. It seemed somehow significant.

"Why did he disappear?" cried Mr. Satterthwaite. "Why? Why? It is
incredible, a kind of conjuring trick."

"Yes," said Mr. Quin. "A conjuring trick. That describes it exactly.
Atmosphere again, you see. And wherein does the essence of a conjuring
trick lie?"

"'The quickness of the hand deceives the eye,'" quoted Mr.
Satterthwaite glibly.

"That is everything, is it not? To deceive the eye? Sometimes by the
quickness of the hand, sometimes--by other means. There are many
devices, the pistol shot, the waving of a red handkerchief, something
that seems important, but in reality is not. The eye is diverted from
the real business, it is caught by the spectacular action that means
nothing--nothing at all."

Mr. Satterthwaite leaned forward, his eyes shining. "There is something
in that. It is an idea."

He went on softly. "The pistol shot. What was the pistol shot in the
conjuring trick we are discussing? What is the spectacular moment that
holds the imagination?"

He drew in his breath sharply. "The disappearance," breathed Mr.
Satterthwaite. "Take that away, and it leaves nothing."

"Nothing? Suppose things took the same course without that dramatic
gesture."

"You mean--supposing Miss Le Couteau were still to sell Ashley Grange
to Mr. Bradburn and leave--for no reason?"

"Well."

"Well, why not? It would have aroused talk, I suppose; there would have
been a lot of interest displayed in the value of the contents, in--Ah!
wait!"

He was silent a minute, then burst out. "You are right, there is too
much limelight, the limelight on Captain Harwell. And because of that,
_she_ has been in shadow. _Miss Le Couteau!_ Everyone asking 'Who
was Captain Harwell? Where did he come from?' But because she is the
injured party, no one makes inquiries about her. Was she really a
French Canadian? Were those wonderful heirlooms really handed down to
her? You were right when you said just now that we had not wandered far
from our subject--_only across the Channel_. Those so-called heirlooms
were stolen from the French châteaux, most of them valuable _objets
d'art_, and in consequence difficult to dispose of. She buys the
house--for a mere song, probably--settles down there and pays a good
sum to an irreproachable Englishwoman to chaperon her. Then _he_ comes.
The plot is laid beforehand. The marriage, the disappearance, and the
nine days' wonder! What more natural than that a brokenhearted woman
should want to sell everything that reminds her of past happiness? The
American is a connoisseur, the things are genuine and beautiful, some
of them beyond price. He makes an offer, she accepts it. She leaves the
neighborhood, a sad and tragic figure. The great _coup_ has come off.
The eye of the public has been deceived by the quickness of the hand
and the spectacular nature of the trick."

Mr. Satterthwaite paused, flushed with triumph.

"But for you, I should never have seen it," he said with sudden
humility. "You have a most curious effect upon me. One says things so
often without even seeing what they really mean. You have the knack
of showing one. But it is still not quite clear to me. It must have
been most difficult for Harwell to disappear as he did. After all, the
police all over England were looking for him."

"They were probably looking," said Mr. Quin, "all over England."

"It would have been simplest to remain hidden at the Grange," mused Mr.
Satterthwaite. "If it could be managed."

"He was, I think, very near the Grange," said Mr. Quin.

His look of significance was not lost on Mr. Satterthwaite. "Mathias's
cottage?" he exclaimed. "But the police must have searched it?"

"Repeatedly, I should imagine," said Mr. Quin.

"Mathias," said Mr. Satterthwaite, frowning.

"And Mrs. Mathias," said Mr. Quin.

Mr. Satterthwaite stared hard at him. "If that gang was really the
Clondinis," he said dreamily, "there are three of them in it. The two
young ones were Harwell and Eleanor Le Couteau. The mother now, was she
Mrs. Mathias? But in that case--"

"Mathias suffered from rheumatism, did he not?" said Mr. Quin
innocently.

"Oh!" cried Mr. Satterthwaite. "I have it. But could it be done? I
believe it could. Listen. Mathias was there a month. During that time,
Harwell and Eleanor were away for a fortnight on a honeymoon. For the
fortnight before the wedding, they were supposedly in town. A clever
man could have doubled the parts of Harwell and Mathias. When Harwell
was at Kirtlington Mallet, Mathias was conveniently laid up with
rheumatism, with Mrs. Mathias to sustain the fiction. Her part was very
necessary. Without her, someone might have suspected the truth. As you
say, Harwell was hidden in Mathias's cottage. He _was_ Mathias. When
at last the plans matured, and Ashley Grange was sold, he and his wife
gave out that they were taking a place in Essex. Exit John Mathias and
his wife--forever."

There was a knock at the coffee-room door, and Masters entered.

"The car is at the door, sir," he said.

Mr. Satterthwaite rose. So did Mr. Quin, who went across to the window,
pulling the curtains. A beam of moonlight streamed into the room.

"The storm is over," he said.

Mr. Satterthwaite was pulling on his gloves. "The Commissioner is
dining with me next week," he said importantly. "I shall put my
theory--ah!--before him."

"It will be easily proved or disproved," said Mr. Quin. "A comparison
of the objects at Ashley Grange with a list supplied by the French
police--!"

"Just so," said Mr. Satterthwaite. "Rather hard luck on Mr. Bradburn,
but--well--"

"He can, I believe, stand the loss," said Mr. Quin.

Mr. Satterthwaite held out his hand. "Good-by," he said. "I cannot
tell you how much I have appreciated this unexpected meeting. You are
leaving here tomorrow, I think you said?"

"Possibly tonight. My business here is done. I come and go, you know."

Mr. Satterthwaite remembered hearing those same words earlier in the
evening. Rather curious.

He went out to the car and the waiting Masters. From the open door into
the bar the landlord's voice floated out, rich and complacent.

"A dark mystery," he was saying. "A dark mystery, that's what it is."

But he did not use the word "dark." The word he used suggested quite
a different color. Mr. William Jones was a man of discrimination who
suited his adjectives to his company. The company in the bar liked
their adjectives full flavored.

Mr. Satterthwaite reclined luxuriously in the comfortable limousine.
His breast was swelled with triumph. He saw the girl Mary come out on
the steps and stand under the creaking inn sign.

"She little knows," said Mr. Satterthwaite to himself. "She little
knows what _I_ am going to do!"

The sign of the Bells and Motley swayed gently in the wind.




                          THE SIGN IN THE SKY


The judge was finishing his charge to the jury:

"Now, gentlemen, I have almost finished what I want to say to you.
There is evidence for you to consider as to whether this case is
plainly made out against this man so that you may say he is guilty of
the murder of Vivien Barnaby. You have had the evidence of the servants
as to the time the shot was fired. They have one and all agreed upon
it. You have had the evidence of the letter written to the defendant
by Vivien Barnaby on the morning of that same day, Friday, September
23rd, a letter which the defense has not attempted to deny. You have
had evidence that the prisoner first denied having been at Deering
Hill, and later, after evidence had been given by the police, admitted
he had. You will draw your own conclusions from that denial. This
is not a case of direct evidence. You will have to come to your own
conclusions on the subject of motive--of means--of opportunity. The
contention of the defense is that some person unknown entered the music
room after the defendant had left it, and shot Vivien Barnaby with the
gun which by a strange forgetfulness the defendant had left behind him.
You have heard the defendant's story of the reason it took him half
an hour to get home. If you disbelieve the defendant's story and are
satisfied, beyond any reasonable doubt, that the defendant did, upon
Friday, September 23rd, discharge his gun at close quarters to Vivien
Barnaby's head with intent to kill her, then, gentlemen, your verdict
must be guilty. If, on the other hand, you have any reasonable doubt,
it is your duty to acquit the prisoner. I will now ask you to retire
to your room and consider and let me know when you have arrived at a
conclusion."

The jury were absent a little under half an hour. They returned the
verdict that to everyone had seemed a foregone conclusion, the verdict
of "Guilty."

Mr. Satterthwaite left the court after hearing the verdict, with a
thoughtful frown on his face.

A mere murder trial, as such, did not attract him. He was of too
fastidious a temperament to find interest in the sordid details of
the average crime. But the Wylde case had been different. Young
Martin Wylde was what is termed a gentleman--and the victim, Sir
George Barnaby's young wife, had been personally known to the elderly
gentleman.

He was thinking of all this as he walked up Holborn, and then plunged
into a tangle of mean streets leading in the direction of Soho. In
one of these streets there was a small restaurant, known only to the
few, of whom Mr. Satterthwaite was one. It was not cheap--it was, on
the contrary, exceedingly expensive, since it catered exclusively for
the palate of the jaded gourmet. It was quiet--no strains of jazz were
allowed to disturb the hushed atmosphere--it was rather dark; waiters
appeared soft-footed out of the twilight, bearing silver dishes with
the air of participating in some holy rite. The name of the restaurant
was Arlecchino.

Still thoughtful, Mr. Satterthwaite turned into the Arlecchino and made
for his favorite table in a recess in the far corner. Owing to the
twilight before-mentioned, it was not until he was quite close to it
that he saw it was already occupied by a tall, dark man who sat with
his face in shadow, and with a play of color from a stained window
turning his sober garb to a kind of riotous motley.

Mr. Satterthwaite would have turned back, but just at that moment the
stranger moved slightly and the other recognized him.

"God bless my soul," said Mr. Satterthwaite, who was given to
old-fashioned expressions. "Why, it's Mr. Quin!"

Three times before he had met Mr. Quin, and each time the meeting had
resulted in something a little out of the ordinary. A strange person,
this Mr. Quin, with a knack of showing you the things you had known
all along in a totally different light.

At once Mr. Satterthwaite felt excited--pleasurably excited. His role
was that of the looker-on, and he knew it, but sometimes, when in the
company of Mr. Quin, he had the illusion of being an actor--and the
principal actor at that.

"This is very pleasant," he said, beaming all over his dried-up little
face. "Very pleasant indeed. You've no objection to my joining you, I
hope?"

"I shall be delighted," said Mr. Quin. "As you see, I have not yet
begun my meal."

A deferential headwaiter hovered up out of the shadows. Mr.
Satterthwaite, as befitted a man with a seasoned palate, gave his whole
mind to the task of selection. In a few minutes, the headwaiter, a
slight smile of approbation on his lips, retired, and a young satellite
began his ministrations. Mr. Satterthwaite turned to Mr. Quin.

"I have just come from the Old Bailey," he began. "A sad business, I
thought."

"He was found guilty?" said Mr. Quin.

"Yes, the jury were out only half an hour."

Mr. Quin bowed his head. "An inevitable result--on the evidence," he
said.

"And yet--" began Mr. Satterthwaite--and stopped.

Mr. Quin finished the sentence for him. "And yet your sympathies were
with the accused? Is that what you were going to say?"

"I suppose it was. Martin Wylde is a nice-looking young fellow--one can
hardly believe it of him. All the same, there have been a good many
nice-looking young fellows lately who have turned out to be murderers
of a particularly cold-blooded and repellent type."

"Too many," said Mr. Quin quietly.

"I beg your pardon?" said Mr. Satterthwaite, slightly startled.

"Too many for Martin Wylde. There has been a tendency from the
beginning to regard this as just one more of a series of the same type
of crime--a man seeking to free himself from one woman in order to
marry another."

"Well," said Mr. Satterthwaite, doubtfully. "On the evidence--"

"Ah!" said Mr. Quin quickly, "I am afraid I have not followed all the
evidence."

Mr. Satterthwaite's self-confidence came back to him with a rush. He
felt a sudden sense of power. He was tempted to be consciously dramatic.

"Let me try and show it to you. I have met the Barnabys, you
understand. I know the peculiar circumstances. With me you will come
behind the scenes--you will see the thing from inside."

Mr. Quin leaned forward with his quick encouraging smile. "If anyone
can show me that, it will be Mr. Satterthwaite," he murmured.

Mr. Satterthwaite gripped the table with both hands. He was uplifted,
carried out of himself. For the moment he was an artist pure and
simple--an artist whose medium was words.

Swiftly, with a dozen broad strokes, he etched in the picture of life
at Deering Hill. Sir George Barnaby, elderly, obese, purse-proud. A man
perpetually fussing over the little things of life. A man who wound up
his clocks every Friday afternoon, and who paid his own housekeeping
books every Tuesday morning, and who always saw to the locking of his
own front door every night. A careful man.

And from Sir George he went on to Lady Barnaby. Here his touch was
gentler, but none the less sure. He had seen her but once, but
his impression of her was definite and lasting. A vivid, defiant
creature--pitifully young. A trapped child, that was how he described
her.

"She hated him, you understand? She had married him before she knew
what she was doing. And now--"

She was desperate--that was how he put it. Turning this way and that.
She had no money of her own; she was entirely dependent on this
elderly husband. But all the same she was a creature at bay--still
unsure of her own powers, with a beauty that was as yet more promise
than actuality. And she was greedy. Mr. Satterthwaite affirmed that
definitely. Side by side with defiance there ran a greedy streak--a
clasping and a clutching at life.

"I never met Martin Wylde," continued Mr. Satterthwaite. "But I heard
of him. He lived less than a mile away. Farming, that was his line. And
she took an interest in farming--or pretended to. If you ask me, it was
pretending. I think that she saw in him her only way of escape--and she
grabbed at him, greedily, like a child might have done. Well, there
could only be one end to that. We know what that end was, because the
letters were read out in court. He kept her letters--she didn't keep
his, but from the text of hers one can see that he was cooling off. He
admits as much. There was the other girl. She also lived in the village
of Deering Vale. Her father was the doctor there. You saw her in court,
perhaps? No, I remember, you were not there, you said. I shall have
to describe her to you. A fair girl--very fair. Gentle. Perhaps--yes,
perhaps a tiny bit stupid. But very restful, you know. And loyal. Above
all, loyal."

He looked at Mr. Quin for encouragement, and Mr. Quin gave it him by a
slow, appreciative smile. Mr. Satterthwaite went on.

"You heard that last letter read--you must have seen it, in the papers,
I mean. The one written on the morning of Friday, September 13th. It
was full of desperate reproaches and vague threats, and it ended by
begging Martin Wylde to come to Deering Hill that same evening at six
o'clock. '_I will leave the side door open for you, so that no one need
know you have been here. I shall be in the music room._' It was sent by
hand."

Mr. Satterthwaite paused for a minute or two.

"When he was first arrested, you remember, Martin Wylde denied that
he had been to the house at all that evening. His statement was that
he had taken his gun and gone out shooting in the woods. But when the
police brought forward their evidence, that statement broke down. They
had found his fingerprints, you remember, both on the wood of the side
door and on one of the two cocktail glasses on the table in the music
room. He admitted then that he had come to see Lady Barnaby, that they
had had a stormy interview, but that it had ended in his having managed
to soothe her down. He swore that he left his gun outside leaning
against the wall near the door, and that he left Lady Barnaby alive and
well, the time being then a minute or two after a quarter-past six. He
went straight home, he says, but evidence was called to show that he
did not reach his farm until a quarter to seven, and, as I have just
mentioned, it is barely a mile away. It would not take half an hour to
get there. He forgot all about his gun, he declares. Not a very likely
statement--and yet--"

"And yet?" queried Mr. Quin.

"Well," said Mr. Satterthwaite slowly, "it's a possible one, isn't it?
Counsel ridiculed the supposition, of course, but I think he was wrong.
You see, I've known a good many young men, and these emotional scenes
upset them very much--especially the dark nervous type like Martin
Wylde. Women, now, can go through a scene like that and feel positively
better for it afterward, with all their wits about them. It acts like
a safety valve for them, steadies their nerves down and all that. But
I can see Martin Wylde going away with his head in a whirl, sick and
miserable, and without a thought of the gun he had left leaning up
against the wall."

He was silent for some minutes before he went on:

"Not that it matters. For the next part is only too clear,
unfortunately. It was exactly twenty minutes past six when the shot
was heard. All the servants heard it, the cook, the kitchen-maid, the
butler, the housemaid, and Lady Barnaby's own maid. They came rushing
to the music room. She was lying huddled over the arm of her chair. The
gun had been discharged close to the back of her head, so that the shot
hadn't a chance to scatter. At least two of them penetrated the brain."

He paused again and Mr. Quin asked casually, "The servants gave
evidence, I suppose?"

Mr. Satterthwaite nodded. "Yes. The butler got there a second or two
before the others, but their evidence was practically a repetition of
each other's."

"So they _all_ gave evidence," said Mr. Quin musingly. "There were no
exceptions?"

"Now I remember it," said Mr. Satterthwaite, "the housemaid was only
called at the inquest. She's gone to Canada since, I believe."

"I see," said Mr. Quin.

There was a silence, and somehow the air of the little restaurant
seemed to be charged with an uneasy feeling. Mr. Satterthwaite felt
suddenly as though he were on the defensive.

"Why shouldn't she?" he said abruptly.

"Why should she?" said Mr. Quin with a very slight shrug of the
shoulders.

Somehow the question annoyed Mr. Satterthwaite. He wanted to shy away
from it--to get back on familiar ground.

"There couldn't be much doubt who fired the shot. As a matter of fact,
the servants seemed to have lost their heads a bit. There was no one
in the house to take charge. It was some minutes before anyone thought
of ringing up the police, and when they did so, they found that the
telephone was out of order."

"Oh," said Mr. Quin. "The telephone was out of order."

"It was," said Mr. Satterthwaite--and was struck suddenly by the
feeling that he had said something tremendously important. "It might,
of course, have been done on purpose," he said slowly. "But there seems
no point in that. Death was practically instantaneous."

Mr. Quin said nothing, and Mr. Satterthwaite felt that his explanation
was unsatisfactory.

"There was absolutely no one to suspect but young Wylde," he went on.
"By his own account, even, he was only out of the house three minutes
before the shot was fired. And who else could have fired it? Sir George
was at a bridge party a few houses away. He left there at half-past six
and was met just outside the gate by a servant bringing him the news.
The last rubber finished at half-past six exactly--no doubt about that.
Then there was Sir George's secretary, Henry Thompson. He was in London
that day, and actually at a business meeting at the moment the shot was
fired. Finally there is Sylvia Dale, who, after all, had a perfectly
good motive, impossible as it seems that she should have had anything
to do with such a crime. She was at the station of Deering Vale seeing
a friend off by the 6:28 train. That lets her out. Then the servants.
What earthly motive could any one of them have? Besides, they all
arrived on the spot pra